<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<!-- Voluspo -->
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A few editors, following Bugge, in an effort to clarify the poem, place stanzas 22, 28 and 30 before stanzas 1⁠–⁠20, but the arrangement in both manuscripts, followed here, seems logical. In stanza 1 the Volva, or wise-woman, called upon by Othin, answers him and demands a hearing. Evidently she belongs to the race of the giants (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 2), and thus speaks to Othin unwillingly, being compelled to do so by his magic power. <dfn>Holy</dfn>: omitted in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i>; the phrase “holy races” probably means little more than mankind in general. <dfn>Heimdall</dfn>: the watchman of the gods; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 46 and note. Why mankind should be referred to as Heimdall’s sons is uncertain, and the phrase has caused much perplexity. Heimdall seems to have had various attributes, and in the <i xml:lang="non">Rigsthula</i>, wherein a certain Rig appears as the ancestor of the three great classes of men, a fourteenth century annotator identifies Rig with Heimdall, on what authority we do not know, for the Rig of the poem seems much more like Othin (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Rigsthula</i>, introductory prose and note). <dfn>Valfather</dfn> (“Father of the Slain”): Othin, chief of the gods, so called because the slain warriors were brought to him at Valhall (“Hall of the Slain”) by the Valkyries (“Choosers of the Slain”). <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Nine worlds</dfn>: the worlds of the gods (Asgarth), of the Wanes (Vanaheim, <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 21 and note), of the elves (Alfheim), of men (Mithgarth), of the giants (Jotunheim), of fire (Muspellsheim, <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 47 and note), of the dark elves (Svartalfaheim), of the dead (Niflheim), and presumably of the dwarfs (perhaps Nithavellir, <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 37 and note, but the ninth world is uncertain). <dfn>The tree</dfn>: the world-ash Yggdrasil, symbolizing the universe; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 29⁠–⁠35 and notes, wherein Yggdrasil is described at length. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Ymir</dfn>: the giant out of whose body the gods made the world; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 21. In this stanza as quoted in Snorri’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i> the first line runs:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Of old was the age</span>
								<span>ere aught there was.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><dfn>Yawning gap</dfn>: this phrase, “Ginnunga-gap,” is sometimes used as a proper name. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Bur’s sons</dfn>: Othin, Vili, and Ve. Of Bur we know only that his wife was Bestla, daughter of Bolthorn; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, 141. Vili and Ve are mentioned by name in the Eddic poems only in <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, 26. <dfn>Mithgarth</dfn> (“Middle Dwelling”): the world of men. <dfn>Leeks</dfn>: the leek was often used as the symbol of fine growth (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, 17), and it was also supposed to have magic power (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i>, 7). <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Various editors have regarded this stanza as interpolated; Hoffory thinks it describes the northern summer night in which the sun does not set. Lines 3⁠–⁠5 are quoted by Snorri. In the manuscripts line 4 follows line 5. Regarding the sun and moon as daughter and son of Mundilferi, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 23 and note, and <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 37 and note. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Possibly an interpolation, but there seems no strong reason for assuming this. Lines 1⁠–⁠2 are identical with lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 9, and line 2 may have been inserted here from that later stanza. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Ithavoll</dfn> (“Field of Deeds”?): mentioned only here and in stanza 60 as the meeting-place of the gods; it appears in no other connection. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Tables</dfn>: the exact nature of this game, and whether it more closely resembled chess or checkers, has been made the subject of a 400-page treatise, Willard Fiske’s “Chess in Iceland.” <dfn>Giant-maids</dfn>: perhaps the three great Norns, corresponding to the three fates; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 20 and note. Possibly, however, something has been lost after this stanza, and the missing passage, replaced by the catalogue of the dwarfs (stanzas 9⁠–⁠16), may have explained the “giant-maids” otherwise than as Norns. In <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 49, the Norns (this time “three throngs” instead of simply “three”) are spoken of as giant-maidens; <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>, 13, indicates the existence of many lesser Norns, belonging to various races. <dfn>Jotunheim</dfn>: the world of the giants. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here apparently begins the interpolated catalogue of the dwarfs, running through stanza 16; possibly, however, the interpolated section does not begin before stanza 11. Snorri quotes practically the entire section, the names appearing in a somewhat changed order. <dfn>Brimir</dfn> and <dfn>Blain</dfn>: nothing is known of these two giants, and it has been suggested that both are names for Ymir (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 3). Brimir, however, appears in stanza 37 in connection with the home of the dwarfs. Some editors treat the words as common rather than proper nouns, Brimir meaning “the bloody moisture” and Blain being of uncertain significance. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Very few of the dwarfs named in this and the following stanzas are mentioned elsewhere. It is not clear why Durin should have been singled out as authority for the list. The occasional repetitions suggest that not all the stanzas of the catalogue came from the same source. Most of the names presumably had some definite significance, as Northri, Suthri, Austri, and Vestri (“North,” “South,” “East,” and “West”), Althjof (“Mighty Thief”), Mjothvitnir (“Mead-Wolf”), Gandalf (“Magic Elf”), Vindalf (“Wind Elf”), Rathsvith (“Swift in Counsel”), Eikinskjaldi (“Oak Shield”), <abbr>etc.</abbr>, but in many cases the interpretations are sheer guesswork. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The order of the lines in this and the succeeding four stanzas varies greatly in the manuscripts and editions, and the names likewise appear in many forms. <dfn>Regin</dfn>: probably not identical with Regin the son of Hreithmar, who plays an important part in the <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i> and <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>, but <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i>, introductory prose. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Dvalin</dfn>: in Hovamol, 144, Dvalin seems to have given magic runes to the dwarfs, probably accounting for their skill in craftsmanship, while in <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>, 13, he is mentioned as the father of some of the lesser Norns. The story that some of the dwarfs left the rocks and mountains to find a new home on the sands is mentioned, but unexplained, in Snorri’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i>; of <dfn>Lofar</dfn> we know only that he was descended from these wanderers. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Andvari</dfn>: this dwarf appears prominently in the <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i>, which tells how the god Loki treacherously robbed him of his wealth; the curse which he laid on his treasure brought about the deaths of Sigurth, Gunnar, Atli, and many others. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here the poem resumes its course after the interpolated section. Probably, however, something has been lost, for there is no apparent connection between the three giant-maids of stanza 8 and the three gods, Othin, Hönir and Lothur, who in stanza 17 go forth to create man and woman. The word “three” in stanzas 8 and 17 very likely confused some early reciter, or perhaps the compiler himself. <dfn>Ask</dfn> and <dfn>Embla</dfn>: ash and elm; Snorri gives them simply as the names of the first man and woman, but says that the gods made this pair out of trees. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hönir</dfn>: little is known of this god, save that he occasionally appears in the poems in company with Othin and Loki, and that he survives the destruction, assuming in the new age the gift of prophesy (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 63). He was given by the gods as a hostage to the Wanes after their war, in exchange for Njorth (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 21 and note). <dfn>Lothur</dfn>: apparently an older name for Loki, the treacherous but ingenious son of Laufey, whose divinity Snorri regards as somewhat doubtful. He was adopted by Othin, who subsequently had good reason to regret it. Loki probably represents the blending of two originally distinct figures, one of them an old fire-god, hence his gift of heat to the newly created pair. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Yggdrasil</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 2 and note, and <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 29⁠–⁠35 and notes. <dfn>Urth</dfn> (“The Past”): one of the three great Norns. The world-ash is kept green by being sprinkled with the marvelous healing water from her well. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The maidens</dfn>: the three Norns; possibly this stanza should follow stanza 8. <dfn>Dwelling</dfn>: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> has “sæ” (sea) instead of “sal” (hall, home), and many editors have followed this reading, although Snorri’s prose paraphrase indicates “sal.” <dfn>Urth</dfn>, <dfn>Verthandi</dfn> and <dfn>Skuld</dfn>: “Past,” “Present” and “Future.” <dfn>Wood</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: the magic signs (runes) controlling the destinies of men were cut on pieces of wood. Lines 3⁠–⁠4 are probably interpolations from some other account of the Norns. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This follows stanza 20 in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i>; in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> version stanzas 25, 26, 27, 40 and 41 come between stanzas 20 and 21. Editors have attempted all sorts of rearrangements. <dfn>The war</dfn>: the first war was that between the gods and the Wanes. The cult of the Wanes (Vanir) seems to have originated among the seafaring folk of the Baltic and the southern shores of the North Sea, and to have spread thence into Norway in opposition to the worship of the older gods; hence the “war.” Finally the two types of divinities were worshipped in common; hence the treaty which ended the war with the exchange of hostages. Chief among the Wanes were Njorth and his children, Freyr and Freyja, all of whom became conspicuous among the gods. Beyond this we know little of the Wanes, who seem originally to have been water-deities. <dfn>I remember</dfn>: the manuscripts have “she remembers,” but the Volva is apparently still speaking of her own memories, as in stanza 2. <dfn>Gollveig</dfn> (“Gold-Might”): apparently the first of the Wanes to come among the gods, her ill-treatment being the immediate cause of the war. Müllenhoff maintains that Gollveig is another name for Freyja. Lines 5⁠–⁠6, one or both of them probably interpolated, seem to symbolize the refining of gold by fire. <dfn>Hor</dfn> (“The High One”): Othin. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Heith</dfn> (“Shining One”?): a name often applied to wise-women and prophetesses. The application of this stanza to Gollveig is far from clear, though the reference may be to the magic and destructive power of gold. It is also possible that the stanza is an interpolation. Bugge maintains that it applies to the Volva who is reciting the poem, and makes it the opening stanza, following it with stanzas 28 and 30, and then going on with stanzas 1 <abbr>ff.</abbr> The text of line 2 is obscure, and has been variously emended. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza and stanza 24 have been transposed from the order in the manuscripts, for the former describes the battle and the victory of the Wanes, after which the gods took council, debating whether to pay tribute to the victors, or to admit them, as was finally done, to equal rights of worship. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Possibly, as Finn Magnusen long ago suggested, there is something lost after stanza 24, but it was not the custom of the Eddic poets to supply transitions which their hearers could generally be counted on to understand. The story referred to in stanzas 25⁠–⁠26 (both quoted by Snorri) is that of the rebuilding of Asgarth after its destruction by the Wanes. The gods employed a giant as builder, who demanded as his reward the sun and moon, and the goddess Freyja for his wife. The gods, terrified by the rapid progress of the work, forced Loki, who had advised the bargain, to delay the giant by a trick, so that the work was not finished in the stipulated time (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 44, note). The enraged giant then threatened the gods, whereupon Thor slew him. <dfn>Oth’s bride</dfn>: Freyja; of Oth little is known beyond the fact that Snorri refers to him as a man who “went away on long journeys.” <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Thor</dfn>: the thunder-god, son of Othin and Jorth (Earth); <abbr>cf.</abbr> particularly <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i> and <i xml:lang="non">Thrymskvitha</i>, passim. <dfn>Oaths</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: the gods, by violating their oaths to the giant who rebuilt Asgarth, aroused the undying hatred of the giants’ race, and thus the giants were among their enemies in the final battle. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here the Volva turns from her memories of the past to a statement of some of Othin’s own secrets in his eternal search for knowledge (stanzas 27⁠–⁠29). Bugge puts this stanza after stanza 29. <dfn>The horn of Heimdall</dfn>: the Gjallarhorn (“Shrieking Horn”), with which Heimdall, watchman of the gods, will summon them to the last battle. Till that time the horn is buried under Yggdrasil. <dfn>Valfather’s pledge</dfn>: Othin’s eye (the sun?), which he gave to the water-spirit Mimir (or Mim) in exchange for the latter’s wisdom. It appears here and in stanza 29 as a drinking-vessel, from which Mimir drinks the magic mead, and from which he pours water on the ash Yggdrasil. Othin’s sacrifice of his eye in order to gain knowledge of his final doom is one of the series of disasters leading up to the destruction of the gods. There were several differing versions of the story of Othin’s relations with Mimir; another one, quite incompatible with this, appears in stanza 47. In the manuscripts <dfn>I know</dfn> and <dfn>I see</dfn> appear as “she knows” and “she sees” (<abbr>cf.</abbr> note on 21). <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> version omits all of stanzas 28⁠–⁠34, stanza 27 being there followed by stanzas 40 and 41. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> indicates stanzas 28 and 29 as a single stanza. Bugge puts stanza 28 after stanza 22, as the second stanza of his reconstructed poem. The Volva here addresses Othin directly, intimating that, although he has not told her, she knows why he has come to her, and what he has already suffered in his search for knowledge regarding his doom. Her reiterated “would you know yet more?” seems to mean: “I have proved my wisdom by telling of the past and of your own secrets; is it your will that I tell likewise of the fate in store for you?” <dfn>The Old One</dfn>: Othin. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first line, not in either manuscript, is a conjectural emendation based on Snorri’s paraphrase. Bugge puts this stanza after stanza 20. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is apparently the transitional stanza, in which the Volva, rewarded by Othin for her knowledge of the past (stanzas 1⁠–⁠29), is induced to proceed with her real prophecy (stanzas 31⁠–⁠66). Some editors turn the stanza into the third person, making it a narrative link. Bugge, on the other hand, puts it after stanza 28 as the third stanza of the poem. No lacuna is indicated in the manuscripts, and editors have attempted various emendations. <dfn>Heerfather</dfn> (“Father of the Host”): Othin. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Valkyries</dfn>: these “Choosers of the Slain” (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 1, note) bring the bravest warriors killed in battle to Valhall, in order to reinforce the gods for their final struggle. They are also called “Wish-Maidens,” as the fulfillers of Othin’s wishes. The conception of the supernatural warrior-maiden was presumably brought to Scandinavia in very early times from the South-Germanic races, and later it was interwoven with the likewise South-Germanic tradition of the swan-maiden. A third complication developed when the originally quite human women of the hero-legends were endowed with the qualities of both Valkyries and swan-maidens, as in the cases of Brynhild (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, introductory note), Svava (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar</i>, prose after stanza 5 and note) and Sigrun (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, 17 and note). The list of names here given may be an interpolation; a quite different list is given in <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 36. <dfn>Ranks of the gods</dfn>: some editors regard the word thus translated as a specific place name. <dfn>Herjan</dfn> (“Leader of Hosts”): Othin. It is worth noting that the name <dfn>Hild</dfn> (“Warrior”) is the basis of Bryn-hild (“Warrior in Mail-Coat”). <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Baldr</dfn>: The death of Baldr, the son of Othin and Frigg, was the first of the great disasters to the gods. The story is fully told by Snorri. Frigg had demanded of all created things, saving only the mistletoe, which she thought too weak to be worth troubling about, an oath that they would not harm Baldr. Thus it came to be a sport for the gods to hurl weapons at Baldr, who, of course, was totally unharmed thereby. Loki, the troublemaker, brought the mistletoe to Baldr’s blind brother, Hoth, and guided his hand in hurling the twig. Baldr was slain, and grief came upon all the gods. <abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Baldrs Draumar</i>. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The lines in this and the following stanza have been combined in various ways by editors, lacunæ having been freely conjectured, but the manuscript version seems clear enough. <dfn>The brother of Baldr</dfn>: Vali, whom Othin begot expressly to avenge Baldr’s death. The day after his birth he fought and slew Hoth. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Frigg</dfn>: Othin’s wife. Some scholars have regarded her as a solar myth, calling her the sun-goddess, and pointing out that her home in <dfn>Fensalir</dfn> (“the sea-halls”) symbolizes the daily setting of the sun beneath the ocean horizon. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The translation here follows the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> version. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> has the same final two lines, but in place of the first pair has,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“I know that Vali</span>
								<span>his brother gnawed,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>With his bowels then</span>
								<span>was Loki bound.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Many editors have followed this version of the whole stanza or have included these two lines, often marking them as doubtful, with the four from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i>. After the murder of Baldr, the gods took Loki and bound him to a rock with the bowels of his son Narfi, who had just been torn to pieces by Loki’s other son, Vali. A serpent was fastened above Loki’s head, and the venom fell upon his face. Loki’s wife, <dfn>Sigyn</dfn>, sat by him with a basin to catch the venom, but whenever the basin was full, and she went away to empty it, then the venom fell on Loki again, till the earth shook with his struggles. “And there he lies bound till the end.” <abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, concluding prose. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanzas 36⁠–⁠39 describe the homes of the enemies of the gods: the giants (36), the dwarfs (37), and the dead in the land of the goddess Hel (38⁠–⁠39). The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> version omits stanzas 36 and 37. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> unites 36 with 37, but most editors have assumed a lacuna. <dfn>Slith</dfn> (“the Fearful”): a river in the giants’ home. The “swords and daggers” may represent the icy cold. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Nithavellir</dfn> (“the Dark Fields”): a home of the dwarfs. Perhaps the word should be “Nithafjoll” (“the Dark Crags”). <dfn>Sindri</dfn>: the great worker in gold among the dwarfs. <dfn>Okolnir</dfn> (“the Not Cold”): possibly a volcano. <dfn>Brimir</dfn>: the giant (possibly Ymir) out of whose blood, according to stanza 9, the dwarfs were made; the name here appears to mean simply the leader of the dwarfs. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanzas 38 and 39 follow stanza 43 in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> version. Snorri quotes stanzas 38, 39, 40 and 41, though not consecutively. <dfn>Nastrond</dfn> (“Corpse-Strand”): the land of the dead, ruled by the goddess Hel. Here the wicked undergo tortures. <dfn>Smoke-vent</dfn>: the phrase gives a picture of the Icelandic house, with its opening in the roof serving instead of a chimney. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The stanza is almost certainly in corrupt form. The third line is presumably an interpolation, and is lacking in most of the late paper manuscripts. Some editors, however, have called lines 1⁠–⁠3 the remains of a full stanza, with the fourth line lacking, and lines 4⁠–⁠5 the remains of another. The stanza depicts the torments of the two worst classes of criminals known to Old Norse morality⁠—oath-breakers and murderers. <dfn>Nithhogg</dfn> (“the Dread Biter”): the dragon that lies beneath the ash Yggdrasil and gnaws at its roots, thus symbolizing the destructive elements in the universe; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 32, 35. <dfn>The wolf</dfn>: presumably the wolf Fenrir, one of the children of Loki and the giantess Angrbotha (the others being Mithgarthsorm and the goddess Hel), who was chained by the gods with the marvelous chain Gleipnir, fashioned by a dwarf “out of six things: the noise of a cat’s step, the beards of women, the roots of mountains, the nerves of bears, the breath of fishes, and the spittle of birds.” The chaining of Fenrir cost the god Tyr his right hand; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 44. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> version inserts after stanza 39 the refrain-stanza (44), and puts stanzas 40 and 41 between 27 and 21. With this stanza begins the account of the final struggle itself. <dfn>The giantess</dfn>: her name is nowhere stated, and the only other reference to Ironwood is in <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 39, in this same connection. The children of this giantess and the wolf Fenrir are the wolves Skoll and Hati, the first of whom steals the sun, the second the moon. Some scholars naturally see here an eclipse-myth. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the third line many editors omit the comma after “sun,” and put one after “soon,” making the two lines run:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Dark grows the sun</span>
								<span>in summer soon,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Mighty storms⁠—” <abbr>etc.</abbr></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Either phenomenon in summer would be sufficiently striking. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> version stanzas 42 and 43 stand between stanzas 44 and 38. <dfn>Eggther</dfn>: this giant, who seems to be the watchman of the giants, as Heimdall is that of the gods and Surt of the dwellers in the fire-world, is not mentioned elsewhere in the poems. <dfn>Fjalar</dfn>, the cock whose crowing wakes the giants for the final struggle. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gollinkambi</dfn> (“Gold-Comb”): the cock who wakes the gods and heroes, as Fjalar does the giants. <dfn>The rust-red bird</dfn>: the name of this bird, who wakes the people of Hel’s domain, is nowhere stated. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a refrain-stanza. In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> it appears in full only at this point, but is repeated in abbreviated form before stanzas 50 and 59. In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> version the full stanza comes first between stanzas 35 and 42, then, in abbreviated form, it occurs four times: before stanzas 45, 50, 55, and 59. In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> line 3 runs:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Farther I see</span>
								<span>and more can say.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><dfn>Garm</dfn>: the dog who guards the gates of Hel’s kingdom; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Baldrs Draumar</i>, 2 ff, and <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 44. <dfn>Gnipahellir</dfn> (“the Cliff-Cave”): the entrance to the world of the dead. <dfn>The wolf</dfn>: Fenrir; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 39 and note. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From this point on through stanza 57 the poem is quoted by Snorri, stanza 49 alone being omitted. There has been much discussion as to the status of stanza 45. Lines 4 and 5 look like an interpolation. After line 5 the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> has a line running:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“The world resounds,</span>
								<span>the witch is flying.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Editors have arranged these seven lines in various ways, with lacunæ freely indicated. <dfn>Sisters’ sons</dfn>: in all Germanic countries the relations between uncle and nephew were felt to be particularly close. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> combines the first three lines of this stanza with lines 3, 2, and 1 of stanza 47 as a single stanza. Line 4, not found in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i>, is introduced from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> version, where it follows line 2 of stanza 47. <dfn>The sons of Mim</dfn>: the spirits of the water. On Mim (or Mimir) <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 27 and note. <dfn>Gjallarhorn</dfn>: the “Shrieking Horn” with which Heimdall, the watchman of the gods, calls them to the last battle. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> lines 3, 2, and 1, in that order, follow stanza 46 without separation. Line 4 is not found in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i>, but is introduced from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> version. <dfn>Yggdrasil</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 19 and note, and <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 29⁠–⁠35. <dfn>The giant</dfn>: Fenrir. <dfn>The head of Mim</dfn>: various myths were current about Mimir. This stanza refers to the story that he was sent by the gods with Hönir as a hostage to the Wanes after their war (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 21 and note), and that the Wanes cut off his head and returned it to the gods. Othin embalmed the head, and by magic gave it the power of speech, thus making Mimir’s noted wisdom always available. Of course this story does not fit with that underlying the references to Mimir in stanzas 27 and 29. <dfn>The kinsman of Surt</dfn>: the wolf Fenrir, who slays Othin in the final struggle; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 53. Surt is the giant who rules the fire-world, Muspellsheim; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 52. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> follows stanza 51; in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> it stands, as here, after 47. <dfn>Jotunheim</dfn>: the land of the giants. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Identical with stanza 44. In the manuscripts it is here abbreviated. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hrym</dfn>: the leader of the giants, who comes as the helmsman of the ship Naglfar (line 4). <dfn>The serpent</dfn>: Mithgarthsorm, one of the children of Loki and Angrbotha (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 39, note). The serpent was cast into the sea, where he completely encircles the land; <abbr>cf.</abbr> especially <i xml:lang="non">Hymiskvitha</i>, passim. <dfn>The eagle</dfn>: the giant Hræsvelg, who sits at the edge of heaven in the form of an eagle, and makes the winds with his wings; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 37, and <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, 27. <dfn>Naglfar</dfn>: the ship which was made out of dead men’s nails to carry the giants to battle. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>North</dfn>: a guess; the manuscripts have “east,” but there seems to be a confusion with stanza 50, line 1. <dfn>People of Hel</dfn>: the manuscripts have “people of Muspell,” but these came over the bridge Bifrost (the rainbow), which broke beneath them, whereas the people of Hel came in a ship steered by Loki. <dfn>The wolf</dfn>: Fenrir. <dfn>The brother of Byleist</dfn>: Loki. Of Byleist (or Byleipt) no more is known. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Surt</dfn>: the ruler of the fire-world. <dfn>The scourge of branches</dfn>: fire. This is one of the relatively rare instances in the Eddic poems of the type of poetic diction which characterizes the skaldic verse. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hlin</dfn>: apparently another name for Frigg, Othin’s wife. After losing her son Baldr, she is fated now to see Othin slain by the wolf Fenrir. <dfn>Beli’s slayer</dfn>: the god Freyr, who killed the giant Beli with his fist; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, 16 and note. On Freyr, who belonged to the race of the Wanes, and was the brother of Freyja, see especially <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, passim. <dfn>The joy of Frigg</dfn>: Othin. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As quoted by Snorri the first line of this stanza runs:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Fares Othin’s son</span>
								<span>to fight with the wolf.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><dfn>Sigfather</dfn> (“Father of Victory”): Othin. His son, Vithar, is the silent god, famed chiefly for his great shield, and his strength, which is little less than Thor’s. He survives the destruction. <dfn>The giant’s son</dfn>: Fenrir. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This and the following stanza are clearly in bad shape. In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> only lines 1 and 4 are found, combined with stanza 56 as a single stanza. Line 1 does not appear in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> version, the stanza there beginning with line 2. Snorri, in quoting these two stanzas, omits 55, 2⁠–⁠4, and 56, 3, making a single stanza out of 55, 1, and 56, 4, 2, 1, in that order. Moreover, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> manuscript at this point is practically illegible. The lacuna (line 3) is, of course, purely conjectural, and all sorts of arrangements of the lines have been attempted by editors. <dfn>Hlothyn</dfn>: another name for Jorth (“Earth”), Thor’s mother; his father was Othin. <dfn>The snake</dfn>: Mithgarthsorm; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 5c and note. <dfn>Othin’s son</dfn>: Thor. The fourth line in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> reads “against the wolf,” but if this line refers to Thor at all, and not to Vithar, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> reading, “serpent,” is correct. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The warder of earth</dfn>: Thor. <dfn>The son of Fjorgyn</dfn>: again Thor, who, after slaying the serpent, is overcome by his venomous breath, and dies. Fjorgyn appears in both a masculine and a feminine form. In the masculine it is a name for Othin; in the feminine, as here and in <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 56, it apparently refers to Jorth. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With this stanza ends the account of the destruction. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Again the refrain-stanza (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 44 and note), abbreviated in both manuscripts, as in the case of stanza 49. It is probably misplaced here. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here begins the description of the new world which is to rise out of the wreck of the old one. It is on this passage that a few critics have sought to base their argument that the poem is later than the introduction of Christianity (circa 1000), but this theory has never seemed convincing (<abbr>cf.</abbr> introductory note). <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The third line of this stanza is not found in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i>. <dfn>Ithavoll</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 7 and note. <dfn>The girdler of earth</dfn>: Mithgarthsorm, who, lying in the sea, surrounded the land. <dfn>The Ruler of Gods</dfn>: Othin. The runes were both magic signs, generally carved on wood, and sung or spoken charms. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> version of the first two lines runs:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“The gods shall find there,</span>
								<span>wondrous fair,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>The golden tables</span>
								<span>amid the grass.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>No lacuna (line 4) is indicated in the manuscripts. <dfn>Golden tables</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 8 and note. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Baldr</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 32 and note. Baldr and his brother, Hoth, who unwittingly slew him at Loki’s instigation, return together, their union being a symbol of the new age of peace. <dfn>Hropt</dfn>: another name for Othin. His “battle-hall” is Valhall. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No lacuna (line 2) indicated in the manuscripts. <dfn>Hönir</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 18 and note. In this new age he has the gift of foretelling the future. <dfn>Tveggi</dfn> (“The Twofold”): another name for Othin. His brothers are Vili and Ve (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, 26, and note). Little is known of them, and nothing, beyond this reference, of their sons. <dfn>Vindheim</dfn> (“Home of the Wind”): heaven. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza is quoted by Snorri. <dfn>Gimle</dfn>: Snorri makes this the name of the hall itself, while here it appears to refer to a mountain on which the hall stands. It is the home of the happy, as opposed to another hall, not here mentioned, for the dead. Snorri’s description of this second hall is based on <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 38, which he quotes, and perhaps that stanza properly belongs after 64. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza is not found in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i>, and is probably spurious. No lacuna is indicated in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Hauksbok</i> version, but late paper manuscripts add two lines, running:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Rule he orders,</span>
								<span>and rights he fixes,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>Laws he ordains</span>
								<span>that ever shall live.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The name of this new ruler is nowhere given, and of course the suggestion of Christianity is unavoidable. It is not certain, however, that even this stanza refers to Christianity, and if it does, it may have been interpolated long after the rest of the poem was composed. <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza, which fits so badly with the preceding ones, may well have been interpolated. It has been suggested that the dragon, making a last attempt to rise, is destroyed, this event marking the end of evil in the world. But in both manuscripts the final half-line does not refer to the dragon, but, as the gender shows, to the Volva herself, who sinks into the earth; a sort of conclusion to the entire prophecy. Presumably the stanza (barring the last half-line, which was probably intended as the conclusion of the poem) belongs somewhere in the description of the great struggle. <dfn>Nithhogg</dfn>: the dragon at the roots of Yggdrasil; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 39 and note. <dfn>Nithafjoll</dfn> (“the Dark Crags”); nowhere else mentioned. <dfn>Must I</dfn>: the manuscripts have “must she.” <a href="voluspo.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Hovamol -->
				<li id="note-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza is quoted by Snorri, the second line being omitted in most of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prose Edda</i> manuscripts. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Probably the first and second lines had originally nothing to do with the third and fourth, the last two not referring to host or guest, but to the general danger of backing one’s views with the sword. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 5 and 6 appear to have been added to the stanza. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors have combined this stanza in various ways with the last two lines of stanza 11, as in the manuscript the first two lines of the latter are abbreviated, and, if they belong there at all, are presumably identical with the first two lines of stanza 10. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The heron</dfn>: the bird of forgetfulness, referred to in line 1. <dfn>Gunnloth</dfn>: the daughter of the giant Suttung, from whom Othin won the mead of poetry. For this episode see stanzas 104⁠–⁠110. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Fjalar</dfn>: apparently another name for Suttung. This stanza, and probably 13, seem to have been inserted as illustrative. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first two lines are abbreviated in the manuscript, but are doubtless identical with the first two lines of stanza 24. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The last two lines were probably added as a commentary on lines 3 and 4. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript has “little” in place of “a hut” in line 1, but this involves an error in the initial-rhymes, and the emendation has been generally accepted. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 1 and 2 are abbreviated in the manuscript, but are doubtless identical with the first two lines of stanza 36. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript this stanza follows stanza 40. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The key-word in line 3 is missing in the manuscript, but editors have agreed in inserting a word meaning “generous.” <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In line 3 the manuscript adds “givers again” to “gift-givers.” <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first pairs of lines are abbreviated in the manuscript. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fifth line is probably a spurious addition. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza follows stanza 63 in the manuscript, but there are marks therein indicating the transposition. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates no lacuna (lines 1 and 2). Many editors have filled out the stanza with two lines from late paper manuscripts, the passage running:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“A man must be watchful</span>
								<span>and wary as well,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And fearful of trusting a friend.” <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript has “and a worthy life” in place of “than to lie a corpse” in line 1, but Rask suggested the emendation as early as 1818, and most editors have followed him. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These seven lines are obviously a jumble. The two lines of stanza 73 not only appear out of place, but the verse-form is unlike that of the surrounding stanzas. In 74, the second line is clearly interpolated, and line 1 has little enough connection with lines 3, 4 and 5. It looks as though some compiler (or copyist) had inserted here various odds and ends for which he could find no better place. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The word “gold” in line 2 is more or less conjectural, the manuscript being obscure. The reading in line 4 is also doubtful. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript this stanza follows 78, the order being: 77, 78, 76, 80, 79, 81. <dfn>Fitjung</dfn> (“the Nourisher”): Earth. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza is certainly in bad shape, and probably out of place here. Its reference to runes as magic signs suggests that it properly belongs in some list of charms like the <i xml:lang="non">Ljothatal</i> (stanzas 147⁠–⁠165). The stanza-form is so irregular as to show either that something has been lost or that there have been interpolations. The manuscript indicates no lacuna; Gering fills out the assumed gap as follows: <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Certain is that</span>
								<span>which is sought from runes,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The runes⁠—,” <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With this stanza the verse-form, as indicated in the translation, abruptly changes to Malahattr. What has happened seems to have been something like this. Stanza 80 introduces the idea of man’s love for woman. Consequently some reciter or compiler (or possibly even a copyist) took occasion to insert at this point certain stanzas concerning the ways of women. Thus stanza 80 would account for the introduction of stanzas 81 and 82, which, in turn, apparently drew stanza 83 in with them. Stanza 84 suggests the fickleness of women, and is immediately followed⁠—again with a change of verse-form⁠—by a list of things equally untrustworthy (stanzas 85⁠–⁠90). Then, after a few more stanzas on love in the regular measure of the <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i> (stanzas 91⁠–⁠95), is introduced, by way of illustration, Othin’s story of his adventure with Billing’s daughter (stanzas 96⁠–⁠102). Some such process of growth, whatever its specific stages may have been, must be assumed to account for the curious chaos of the whole passage from stanza 81 to stanza 102. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 3 and 4 are quoted in the <i xml:lang="non">Fostbræthrasaga</i>. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanzas 85⁠–⁠88 and 90 are in Fornyrthislag, and clearly come from a different source from the rest of the <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The stanza is doubtless incomplete. Some editors add from a late paper manuscript two lines running:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“In a light, clear sky</span>
								<span>or a laughing throng,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>In the howl of a dog</span>
								<span>or a harlot’s grief.” <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza follows stanza 89 in the manuscript. Many editors have changed the order, for while stanza 89 is pretty clearly an interpolation wherever it stands, it seriously interferes with the sense if it breaks in between 87 and 88. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here begins the passage (stanzas 96⁠–⁠102) illustrating the falseness of woman by the story of Othin’s unsuccessful love-affair with Billing’s daughter. Of this person we know nothing beyond what is here told, but the story needs little comment. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rask adds at the beginning of this stanza two lines from a late paper manuscript, running:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Few are so good</span>
								<span>that false they are never</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">To cheat the mind of a man.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>He makes these two lines plus lines 1 and 2 a full stanza, and lines 3, 4, 5, and 6 a second stanza. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With this stanza the subject changes abruptly, and apparently the virtues of fair speech, mentioned in the last three lines, account for the introduction, from what source cannot be known, of the story of Othin and the mead of song (stanzas 104⁠–⁠110). <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The giant <dfn>Suttung</dfn> (“the old giant”) possessed the magic mead, a draught of which conferred the gift of poetry. Othin, desiring to obtain it, changed himself into a snake, bored his way through a mountain into Suttung’s home, made love to the giant’s daughter, Gunnloth, and by her connivance drank up all the mead. Then he flew away in the form of an eagle, leaving Gunnloth to her fate. While with Suttung he assumed the name of Bolverk (“the Evildoer”). <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Rati</dfn> (“the Traveller”): the gimlet with which Othin bored through the mountain to reach Suttung’s home. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Probably either the fourth or the fifth line is a spurious addition. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Othrörir</dfn>: here the name of the magic mead itself, whereas in stanza 141 it is the name of the vessel containing it. Othin had no intention of bestowing any of the precious mead upon men, but as he was flying over the earth, hotly pursued by Suttung, he spilled some of it out of his mouth, and in this way mankind also won the gift of poetry. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-96" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hor</dfn>: Othin (“the High One”). The frost-giants, Suttung’s kinsmen, appear not to have suspected Othin of being identical with Bolverk, possibly because the oath referred to in stanza 110 was an oath made by Othin to Suttung that there was no such person as Bolverk among the gods. The giants, of course, fail to get from Othin the information they seek concerning Bolverk, but Othin is keenly conscious of having violated the most sacred of oaths, that sworn on his ring. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With this stanza begins the Loddfafnismol (stanzas 111⁠–⁠138). Loddfafnir is apparently a wandering singer, who, from his “chanter’s stool,” recites the verses which he claims to have received from Othin. <dfn>Wells of Urth</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 19 and note. Urth (“the Past”) is one of the three Norns. This stanza is apparently in corrupt form, and editors have tried many experiments with it, both in rejecting lines as spurious and in rearranging the words and punctuation. It looks rather as though the first four lines formed a complete stanza, and the last four had crept in later. The phrase translated “the speech of Hor” is “Hova mol,” later used as the title for the entire poem. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 1⁠–⁠3 are the formula, repeated (abbreviated in the manuscript) in most of the stanzas, with which Othin prefaces his counsels to Loddfafnir, and throughout this section, except in stanzas 111 and 138, Loddfafnir represents himself as simply quoting Othin’s words. The material is closely analogous to that contained in the first eighty stanzas of the poem. In some cases (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr>, stanzas 117, 119, 121, 126 and 130) the formula precedes a full four-line stanza instead of two (or three) lines. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 5 is apparently interpolated. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 5⁠–⁠6 probably were inserted from a different poem. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many editors reject the last two lines of this stanza as spurious, putting the first two lines at the end of the preceding stanza. Others, attaching lines 3 and 4 to stanza 132, insert as the first two lines of stanza 133 two lines from a late paper manuscript, running:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Evil and good</span>
								<span>do men’s sons ever</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Mingled bear in their breasts.” <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Presumably the last four lines have been added to this stanza, for the parallelism in the last three makes it probable that they belong together. The wrinkled skin of the old man is compared with the dried skins and bellies of animals kept for various purposes hanging in an Icelandic house. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza suggests the dangers of too much hospitality. The beam (bolt) which is ever being raised to admit guests becomes weak thereby. It needs a ring to help it in keeping the door closed, and without the ability at times to ward off guests a man becomes the victim of his own generosity. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The list of “household remedies” in this stanza is doubtless interpolated. Their nature needs no comment here. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript this stanza comes at the end of the entire poem, following stanza 165. Most recent editors have followed Müllenhoff in shifting it to this position, as it appears to conclude the passage introduced by the somewhat similar stanza <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With this stanza begins the most confusing part of the <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>: the group of eight stanzas leading up to the <i xml:lang="non">Ljothatal</i>, or list of charms. Certain paper manuscripts have before this stanza a title: “Othin’s Tale of the Runes.” Apparently stanzas 139, 140 and 142 are fragments of an account of how Othin obtained the runes; 141 is erroneously inserted from some version of the magic mead story (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanzas 104⁠–⁠110); and stanzas 143, 144, 145, and 146 are from miscellaneous sources, all, however, dealing with the general subject of runes. With stanza 147 a clearly continuous passage begins once more. <dfn>The windy tree</dfn>: the ash Yggdrasil (literally “the Horse of Othin,” so called because of this story), on which Othin, in order to win the magic runes, hanged himself as an offering to himself, and wounded himself with his own spear. Lines 5 and 6 have presumably been borrowed from <i xml:lang="non">Svipdagsmol</i>, 30. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza, interrupting as it does the account of Othin’s winning the runes, appears to be an interpolation. The meaning of the stanza is most obscure. Bolthorn was Othin’s grandfather, and Bestla his mother. We do not know the name of the uncle here mentioned, but it has been suggested that this son of Bolthorn was Mimir (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 27 and note, and 47 and note). In any case, the nine magic songs which he learned from his uncle seem to have enabled him to win the magic mead (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanzas 104⁠–⁠110). Concerning <dfn>Othrörir</dfn>, here used as the name of the vessel containing the mead, <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 107 and note. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This and the following stanza belong together, and in many editions appear as a single stanza. They presumably come from some lost poem on the authorship of the runes. Lines 2 and 3 follow line 4 in the manuscript; the transposition was suggested by Bugge. <dfn>The king of singers</dfn>: Othin. The magic signs (runes) were commonly carved in wood, then colored red. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Dain</dfn> and <dfn>Dvalin</dfn>: dwarfs; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 14, and note. Dain, however, may here be one of the elves rather than the dwarf of that name. The two names also appear together in <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 33, where they are applied to two of the four harts that nibble at the topmost twigs of Yggdrasil. <dfn>Alsvith</dfn> (“the All-Wise”) appears nowhere else as a giant’s name. <dfn>Myself</dfn>: Othin. We have no further information concerning the list of those who wrote the runes for the various races, and these four lines seem like a confusion of names in the rather hazy mind of some reciter. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This Malahattr stanza appears to be a regular religious formula, concerned less with the runes which one “writes” and “tints” (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 79) than with the prayers which one “asks” and the sacrifices which one “offers” and “sends.” Its origin is wholly uncertain, but it is clearly an interpolation here. In the manuscript the phrase “knowest?” is abbreviated after the first line. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza as translated here follows the manuscript reading, except in assuming a gap between lines 3 and 5. In Vigfusson and Powell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Corpus Poeticum Boreale</i> the first three lines have somehow been expanded into eight. The last two lines are almost certainly misplaced; Bugge suggests that they belong at the end of stanza 144. <dfn>Thund</dfn>: another name for Othin. <dfn>When home he came</dfn>: presumably after obtaining the runes as described in stanzas 139 and 140. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With this stanza begins the <i xml:lang="non">Ljothatal</i>, or list of charms. The magic songs themselves are not given, but in each case the peculiar application of the charm is explained. The passage, which is certainly approximately complete as far as it goes, runs to the end of the poem. In the manuscript and in most editions line 4 falls into two half-lines, running:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“In sickness and pain</span>
								<span>and every sorrow.” <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Second</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, appear in the manuscript as Roman numerals. The manuscript indicates no gap after line 2. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The sending of a root with runes written thereon was an excellent way of causing death. So died the Icelandic hero Grettir the Strong. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>House-riders</dfn>: witches, who ride by night on the roofs of houses, generally in the form of wild beasts. Possibly one of the last two lines is spurious. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The last line looks like an unwarranted addition, and line 4 may likewise be spurious. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 4⁠–⁠5 are probably expanded from a single line. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The sprinkling of a child with water was an established custom long before Christianity brought its conception of baptism. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza, according to Müllenhoff, was the original conclusion of the poem, the phrase “a fifteenth” being inserted only after stanzas 162⁠–⁠165 had crept in. <dfn>Delling</dfn>: a seldom mentioned god who married Not (Night). Their son was Dag (Day). <dfn>Thjothrörir</dfn>: not mentioned elsewhere. <dfn>Hroptatyr</dfn>: Othin. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors have combined these two lines with stanza 164. Others have assumed that the gap follows the first half-line, making “so that⁠—from me” the end of the stanza. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza is almost certainly an interpolation, and seems to have been introduced after the list of charms and the <i xml:lang="non">Loddfafnismol</i> (stanzas 111⁠–⁠138) were combined in a single poem, for there is no other apparent excuse for the reference to Loddfafnir at this point. The words “if thou mightest get them” are a conjectural emendation. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza is almost totally obscure. The third and fourth lines look like interpolations. <a href="hovamol.xhtml#noteref-123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Vafthruthnismol -->
				<li id="note-124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The phrases “Othin spake,” “Frigg spake,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>, appear in abbreviated form in both manuscripts. <dfn>Frigg</dfn>: Othin’s wife; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 34 and note. <dfn>Vafthruthnir</dfn> (“the Mighty in Riddles”): nothing is known of this giant beyond what is told in this poem. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Heerfather</dfn> (“Father of the Host”): Othin. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This single narrative stanza is presumably a later interpolation. <dfn>Im</dfn>: the name appears to be corrupt, but we know nothing of any son of Vafthruthnir. <dfn>Ygg</dfn> (“the Terrible”): Othin. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gagnrath</dfn> (“the Gain-Counsellor”): Othin on his travels always assumes a name other than his own. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza sounds very much like many of those in the first part of the <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, and may have been introduced here from some such source. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Skinfaxi</dfn>: “Shining-Mane.” <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here, and in general throughout the poem, the two-line introductory formulæ are abbreviated in the manuscripts. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hrimfaxi</dfn>: “Frosty-Mane.” <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Ifing</dfn>: there is no other reference to this river, which never freezes, so that the giants cannot cross it. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Surt</dfn>: the ruler of the fire-world (Muspellsheim), who comes to attack the gods in the last battle; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 52. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Vigrith</dfn>: “the Field of Battle.” Snorri quotes this stanza. <dfn>A hundred miles</dfn>: a general phrase for a vast distance. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With this stanza Vafthruthnir, sufficiently impressed with his guest’s wisdom to invite him to share his own seat, resigns the questioning to Othin. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fragmentary version of this poem in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Arnamagnæan Codex</i> begins in the middle of the first line of this stanza. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Ymir</dfn>: the giant out of whose body the gods made the world; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 3 and note. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In this and in Othin’s following questions, both manuscripts replace the words “next,” “third,” “fourth,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>, by Roman numerals. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Mundilferi</dfn> (“the Turner”?): known only as the father of Mani (the Moon) and Sol (the Sun). Note that, curiously enough, Mani is the boy and Sol the girl. According to Snorri, Sol drove the horses of the sun, and Mani those of the moon, for the gods, indignant that they should have been given such imposing names, took them from their father to perform these tasks. <abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 37. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Delling</dfn> (“the Dayspring”? Probably another form of the name, Dogling, meaning “Son of the Dew” is more correct): the husband of Not (Night); their son was Dag (Day); <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, 161. <dfn>Nor</dfn>: Snorri calls the father of Night Norvi or Narfi, and puts him among the giants. Lines 3⁠–⁠4: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 6. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Neither the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> nor the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Arnamagnæan Codex</i> indicates a lacuna. Most editors have filled out the stanza with two lines from late paper manuscripts:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“And both of these</span>
								<span>shall ever be,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Till the gods to destruction go.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Bugge ingeniously paraphrases Snorri’s prose:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Vindsval’s father</span>
								<span>was Vosuth called,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And rough is all his race.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><dfn>Vindsval</dfn>: “the Wind-Cold,” also called Vindljoni, “the Wind-Man.” <dfn>Svosuth</dfn>: “the Gentle.” <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Ymir’s kin</dfn>: the giants. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Bergelmir</dfn>: when the gods slew Ymir in order to make the world out of his body, so much blood flowed from him that all the frost-giants were drowned except Bergelmir and his wife, who escaped in a boat; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 35. Of <dfn>Thruthgelmir</dfn> (“the Mightily Burning”) we know nothing, but Aurgelmir was the frost-giants’ name for Ymir himself. Thus Ymir was the first of the giants, and so Othin’s question is answered. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri quotes this stanza, and the last two lines are taken from his version, as both of the manuscripts omit them. <dfn>Elivagar</dfn> (“Stormy Waves”): Mogk suggests that this river may have been the Milky Way. At any rate, the venom carried in its waters froze into ice-banks over Ginnunga-gap (the “yawning gap” referred to in <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 3), and then dripped down to make the giant Ymir. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri gives, without materially elaborating on it, the same account of how Ymir’s son and daughter were born under his left arm, and how his feet together created a son. That this offspring should have had six heads is nothing out of the ordinary, for various giants had more than the normal number, and Hymir’s mother is credited with a little matter of nine hundred heads; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hymiskvitha</i>, 8. Of the career of Ymir’s six-headed son we know nothing; he may have been the Thruthgelmir of stanza 29. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri quotes this stanza. <dfn>Bergelmir</dfn>: on him and his boat <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 29 and note. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri quotes this stanza. <dfn>Hræsvelg</dfn> (“the Corpse-Eater”): on this giant in eagle’s form <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 50, and <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, 27. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With this stanza the question-formula changes, and Othin’s questions from this point on concern more or less directly the great final struggle. Line 4 is presumably spurious. <dfn>Njorth</dfn>: on Njorth and the Wanes, who gave him as a hostage to the gods at the end of their war, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 21 and note. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In both manuscripts, apparently through the carelessness of some older copyist, stanzas 40 and 41 are run together: “Eleventh answer me well, what men in the home mightily battle each day? They fell each other, and fare from the fight all healed full soon to sit.” Luckily Snorri quotes stanza 41 in full, and the translation is from his version. Stanza 40 should probably run something like this:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Eleventh answer me well,</span>
								<span>if thou knowest all</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The fate that is fixed for the gods:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>What men are they</span>
								<span>who in Othin’s home</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Each day to fight go forth?” <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The heroes</dfn>: those brought to Valhall by the Valkyries. After the day’s fighting they are healed of their wounds and all feast together. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Nine worlds</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 2. <dfn>Niflhel</dfn>: “Dark-Hell.” <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The mighty winter</dfn>: Before the final destruction three winters follow one another with no intervening summers. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri quotes this stanza. <dfn>Hoddmimir’s wood</dfn>: probably this is the ash-tree Yggdrasil, which is sometimes referred to as “Mimir’s Tree,” because Mimir waters it from his well; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 27 and note, and <i xml:lang="non">Svipdagsmol</i>, 30 and note. Hoddmimir is presumably another name for Mimir. <dfn>Lif</dfn> (“Life”) and <dfn>Lifthrasir</dfn> (“Sturdy of Life”?): nothing further is known of this pair, from whom the new race of men is to spring. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Fenrir</dfn>: there appears to be a confusion between the wolf Fenrir (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 39 and note) and his son, the wolf Skoll, who steals the sun (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 40 and note). <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri quotes this stanza. <dfn>Alfrothul</dfn> (“the Elf-Beam”): the sun. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Mogthrasir</dfn> (“Desiring Sons”): not mentioned elsewhere in the Eddic poems, or by Snorri. <dfn>The maidens</dfn>: apparently Norns, like the “giant-maids” in <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 8. These Norns, however, are kindly to men. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Surt</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 52 and note. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Vithar</dfn>: a son of Othin, who slays the wolf Fenrir; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 54 and note. <dfn>Vali</dfn>: the son whom Othin begot to avenge Baldr’s death; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 33 and note. <dfn>Mothi</dfn> (“Wrath”) and <dfn>Magni</dfn> (“Might”): the sons of the god Thor, who after his death inherit his famous hammer, <dfn>Mjollnir</dfn>. Concerning this hammer <abbr>cf.</abbr> especially <i xml:lang="non">Thrymskvitha</i>, passim. <dfn>Vingnir</dfn> (“the Hurler”): Thor. Concerning his death <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 56. This stanza is quoted by Snorri. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The wolf</dfn>: Fenrir; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 53 and 54. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>His son</dfn>: Baldr. Bugge changes lines 3⁠–⁠4 to run:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“What did Othin speak</span>
								<span>in the ear of Baldr,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">When to the bale-fire they bore him?”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>For Baldr’s death <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 32 and note. The question is, of course, unanswerable save by Othin himself, and so the giant at last recognizes his guest. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Fated</dfn>: in stanza 19 Vafthruthnir was rash enough to wager his head against his guest’s on the outcome of the contest of wisdom, so he knows that his defeat means his death. <a href="vafthruthnismol.xhtml#noteref-161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Grimnismol -->
				<li id="note-162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The texts of the two manuscripts differ in many minor details. <dfn>Hrauthung</dfn>: this mythical king is not mentioned elsewhere. <dfn>Geirröth</dfn>: the manuscripts spell his name in various ways. <dfn>Frigg</dfn>: Othin’s wife. She and Othin nearly always disagreed in some such way as the one outlined in this story. <dfn>Hlithskjolf</dfn> (“Gate-Shelf”): Othin’s watchtower in heaven, whence he can overlook all the nine worlds; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, introductory prose. <dfn>Grimnir</dfn>: “the Hooded One.” <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the original lines 2 and 4 are both too long for the meter, and thus the true form of the stanza is doubtful. For line 4 both manuscripts have “the land of the Goths” instead of simply “the Goths.” The word “Goths” apparently was applied indiscriminately to any South-Germanic people, including the Burgundians as well as the actual Goths, and thus here has no specific application; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 35 and note. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Veratyr</dfn> (“Lord of Men”): Othin. The “gift” which Agnar receives is Othin’s mythological lore. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Thruthheim</dfn> (“the Place of Might”): the place where Thor, the strongest of the gods, has his hall, Bilskirnir, described in stanza 24. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Ydalir</dfn> (“Yew-Dales”): the home of Ull, the archer among the gods, a son of Thor’s wife, Sif, by another marriage. The wood of the yew-tree was used for bows in the North just as it was long afterwards in England. <dfn>Alfheim</dfn>: the home of the elves. <dfn>Freyr</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, introductory prose and note. <dfn>Tooth-gift</dfn>: the custom of making a present to a child when it cuts its first tooth is, according to Vigfusson, still in vogue in Iceland. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Valaskjolf</dfn> (“the Shelf of the Slain”): Othin’s home, in which is his watchtower, Hlithskjolf. Gering identifies this with Valhall, and as that is mentioned in stanza 8, he believes stanza 6 to be an interpolation. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sökkvabekk</dfn> (“the Sinking Stream”): of this spot and of Saga, who is said to live there, little is known. Saga may be an hypostasis of Frigg, but Snorri calls her a distinct goddess, and the name suggests some relation to history or story-telling. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Glathsheim</dfn> (“the Place of Joy”): Othin’s home, the greatest and most beautiful hall in the world. <dfn>Valhall</dfn> (“Hall of the Slain”): <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 31 and note. Valhall is not only the hall whither the slain heroes are brought by the Valkyries, but also a favorite home of Othin. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The opening formula is abbreviated in both manuscripts. <dfn>A wolf</dfn>: probably the wolf and the eagle were carved figures above the door. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Thrymheim</dfn> (“the Home of Clamor”): on this mountain the giant Thjazi built his home. The god, or rather Wane, Njorth (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 21, note) married Thjazi’s daughter, Skathi. She wished to live in her father’s hall among the mountains, while Njorth loved his home, Noatun, by the sea. They agreed to compromise by spending nine nights at Thrymheim and then three at Noatun, but neither could endure the surroundings of the other’s home, so Skathi returned to Thrymheim, while Njorth stayed at Noatun. Snorri quotes stanzas 11⁠–⁠15. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Breithablik</dfn> (“Wide-Shining”): the house in heaven, free from everything unclean, in which Baldr (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 32, note), the fairest and best of the gods, lived. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Himinbjorg</dfn> (“Heaven’s Cliffs”): the dwelling at the end of the bridge Bifrost (the rainbow), where Heimdall (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 27) keeps watch against the coming of the giants. In this stanza the two functions of Heimdall⁠—as father of mankind (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 1 and note, and <i xml:lang="non">Rigsthula</i>, introductory prose and note) and as warder of the gods⁠—seem both to be mentioned, but the second line in the manuscripts is apparently in bad shape, and in the editions is more or less conjectural. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Folkvang</dfn> (“Field of the Folk”): here is situated Freyja’s hall, Sessrymnir (“Rich in Seats”). Freyja, the sister of Freyr, is the fairest of the goddesses, and the most kindly disposed to mankind, especially to lovers. <dfn>Half of the dead</dfn>: Mogk has made it clear that Freyja represents a confusion between two originally distinct divinities: the wife of Othin (Frigg) and the northern goddess of love. This passage appears to have in mind her attributes as Othin’s wife. Snorri has this same confusion, but there is no reason why the Freyja who was Freyr’s sister should share the slain with Othin. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Glitnir</dfn> (“the Shining”): the home of Forseti, a god of whom we know nothing beyond what Snorri tells us: “Forseti is the son of Baldr and Nanna, daughter of Nep. All those who come to him with hard cases to settle go away satisfied; he is the best judge among gods and men.” <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Noatun</dfn> (“Ships’-Haven”): the home of Njorth, who calms the waves; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 11 and <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 21. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Vithi</dfn>: this land is not mentioned elsewhere. <dfn>Vithar</dfn> avenged his father, Othin, by slaying the wolf Fenrir. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanzas 18⁠–⁠20 appear also in Snorri’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i>. Very possibly they are an interpolation here. <dfn>Eldhrimnir</dfn> (“Sooty with Fire”): the great kettle in Valhall, wherein the gods’ cook, <dfn>Andhrimnir</dfn> (“The Sooty-Faced”) daily cooks the flesh of the boar <dfn>Sæhrimnir</dfn> (“The Blackened”). His flesh suffices for all the heroes there gathered, and each evening he becomes whole again, to be cooked the next morning. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Freki</dfn> (“The Greedy”) and <dfn>Geri</dfn> (“The Ravenous”): the two wolves who sit by Othin’s side at the feast, and to whom he gives all the food set before him, since wine is food and drink alike for him. <dfn>Heerfather</dfn>: Othin. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Mithgarth</dfn> (“The Middle Home”): the earth. <dfn>Hugin</dfn> (“Thought”) and <dfn>Munin</dfn> (“Memory”): the two ravens who sit on Othin’s shoulders, and fly forth daily to bring him news of the world. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Thund</dfn> (“The Swollen” or “The Roaring”): the river surrounding Valhall. <dfn>Thjothvitnir’s fish</dfn>: presumably the sun, which was caught by the wolf Skoll (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 40), Thjothvitnir meaning “the mighty wolf.” Such a phrase, characteristic of all Skaldic poetry, is rather rare in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i>. The last two lines refer to the attack on Valhall by the people of Hel; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 51. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Valgrind</dfn> (“The Death-Gate”): the outer gate of Valhall; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 68 and note. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This and the following stanza stand in reversed order in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i>. Snorri quotes stanza 23 as a proof of the vast size of Valhall. The last two lines refer to the final battle with Fenrir and the other enemies. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza is almost certainly an interpolation, brought in through a confusion of the first two lines with those of stanza 23. Its description of Thor’s house, Bilskirnir (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 4 and note) has nothing to do with that of Valhall. Snorri quotes the stanza in his account of Thor. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first line in the original is, as indicated in the translation, too long, and various attempts to amend it have been made. <dfn>Heithrun</dfn>: the she-goat who lives on the twigs of the tree <dfn>Lærath</dfn> (presumably the ash Yggdrasil), and daily gives mead which, like the boar’s flesh, suffices for all the heroes in Valhall. In Snorri’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i> Gangleri foolishly asks whether the heroes drink water, whereto Har replies, “Do you imagine that Othin invites kings and earls and other noble men, and then gives them water to drink?” <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Eikthyrnir</dfn> (“The Oak-Thorned,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, with antlers, “thorns,” like an oak): this animal presumably represents the clouds. The first line, like that of stanza 25, is too long in the original. <dfn>Lærath</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 25, note. <dfn>Hvergelmir</dfn>: according to Snorri, this spring, “the Cauldron-Roaring,” was in the midst of Niflheim, the world of darkness and the dead, beneath the third root of the ash Yggdrasil. Snorri gives a list of the rivers flowing thence nearly identical with the one in the poem. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The entire passage from stanza 27 through stanza 35 is confused. The whole thing may well be an interpolation. Bugge calls stanzas 27⁠–⁠30 an interpolation, and editors who have accepted the passage as a whole have rejected various lines. The spelling of the names of the rivers varies greatly in the manuscripts and editions. It is needless here to point out the many attempted emendations of this list. For a passage presenting similar problems, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 10⁠–⁠16. Snorri virtually quotes stanzas 27⁠–⁠28 in his prose, though not consecutively. The name <dfn>Rin</dfn>, in line 3, is identical with that for the River Rhine which appears frequently in the hero poems, but the similarity is doubtless purely accidental. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Slith</dfn> may possibly be the same river as that mentioned in <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 36, as flowing through the giants’ land. <dfn>Leipt</dfn>: in <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 29, this river is mentioned as one by which a solemn oath is sworn, and Gering points the parallel to the significance of the Styx among the Greeks. The other rivers here named are not mentioned elsewhere in the poems. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza looks as though it originally had had nothing to do with the two preceding it. Snorri quotes it in his description of the three roots of Yggdrasil, and the three springs beneath them. “The third root of the ash stands in heaven and beneath this root is a spring which is very holy, and is called Urth’s well.” (<abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 19) “There the gods have their judgment-seat, and thither they ride each day over Bifrost, which is also called the Gods’ Bridge.” Thor has to go on foot in the last days of the destruction, when the bridge is burning. Another interpretation, however, is that when Thor leaves the heavens (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, when a thunderstorm is over) the rainbow-bridge becomes hot in the sun. Nothing more is known of the rivers named in this stanza. Lines 3⁠–⁠4 are almost certainly interpolated from stanza 30. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza, again possibly an interpolation, is closely paraphrased by Snorri following the passage quoted in the previous note. <dfn>Glath</dfn> (“Joyous”): identified in the <i xml:lang="non">Skaldskaparmal</i> with Skinfaxi, the horse of day; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 12. <dfn>Gyllir</dfn>: “Golden.” <dfn>Gler</dfn>: “Shining.” <dfn>Skeithbrimir</dfn>: “Swift-Going.” <dfn>Silfrintopp</dfn>: “Silver-Topped.” <dfn>Sinir</dfn>: “Sinewy.” <dfn>Gisl</dfn>: the meaning is doubtful; Gering suggests “Gleaming.” <dfn>Falhofnir</dfn>: “Hollow-Hoofed.” <dfn>Golltopp</dfn> (“Gold-Topped”): this horse belonged to Heimdall (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 1 and 46). It is noteworthy that gold was one of the attributes of Heimdall’s belongings, and, because his teeth were of gold, he was also called Gullintanni (“Gold-Toothed”). <dfn>Lettfeti</dfn>: “Light-Feet.” Othin’s eight-footed horse, Sleipnir, is not mentioned in this list. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first of these roots is the one referred to in stanza 26; the second in stanza 29 (<abbr>cf.</abbr> notes). Of the third root there is nothing noteworthy recorded. After this stanza it is more than possible that one has been lost, paraphrased in the prose of Snorri’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i> thus: “An eagle sits in the branches of the ash-tree, and he is very wise; and between his eyes sits the hawk who is called Vethrfolnir.” <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Ratatosk</dfn> (“The Swift-Tusked”): concerning this squirrel, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prose Edda</i> has to add only that he runs up and down the tree conveying the abusive language of the eagle (see note on stanza 31) and the dragon <dfn>Nithhogg</dfn> (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 39 and note) to each other. The hypothesis that Ratatosk “represents the undying hatred between the sustaining and the destroying elements⁠—the gods and the giants,” seems a trifle farfetched. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanzas 33⁠–⁠34 may well be interpolated, and are certainly in bad shape in the Mss. Bugge points out that they are probably of later origin than those surrounding them. Snorri closely paraphrases stanza 33, but without elaboration, and nothing further is known of the <dfn>four harts</dfn>. It may be guessed, however, that they are a late multiplication of the single hart mentioned in stanza 26, just as the list of dragons in stanza 34 seems to have been expanded out of Nithhogg, the only authentic dragon under the root of the ash. <dfn>Highest twigs</dfn>: a guess; the Mss. words are baffling. Something has apparently been lost from lines 3⁠–⁠4, but there is no clue as to its nature. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> note on previous stanza. Nothing further is known of any of the serpents here listed, and the meanings of many of the names are conjectural. Snorri quotes this stanza. Editors have altered it in various ways in an attempt to regularize the meter. <dfn>Goin</dfn> and <dfn>Moin</dfn>: meaning obscure. <dfn>Grafvitnir</dfn>: “The Gnawing Wolf.” <dfn>Grabak</dfn>: “Grayback.” <dfn>Grafvolluth</dfn>: “The Field-Gnawer.” <dfn>Ofnir</dfn> and <dfn>Svafnir</dfn> (“The Bewilderer” and “The Sleep-Bringer”): it is noteworthy that in stanza 54 Othin gives himself these two names. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri quotes this stanza, which concludes the passage, beginning with stanza 25, describing Yggdrasil. If we assume that stanzas 27⁠–⁠34 are later interpolations⁠—possibly excepting 32⁠—this section of the poem reads clearly enough. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri quotes this list of the Valkyries, concerning whom <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 31 and note, where a different list of names is given. <dfn>Hrist</dfn>: “Shaker.” <dfn>Mist</dfn>: “Mist.” <dfn>Skeggjold</dfn>: “Ax-Time.” <dfn>Skogul</dfn>: “Raging” (?). <dfn>Hild</dfn>: “Warrior.” <dfn>Thruth</dfn>: “Might.” <dfn>Hlokk</dfn>: “Shrieking.” <dfn>Herfjotur</dfn>: “Host-Fetter.” <dfn>Gol</dfn>: “Screaming.” <dfn>Geironul</dfn>: “Spear-Bearer.” <dfn>Randgrith</dfn>: “Shield-Bearer.” <dfn>Rathgrith</dfn>: Gering guesses “Plan-Destroyer.” <dfn>Reginleif</dfn>: “Gods’-Kin.” Manuscripts and editions vary greatly in the spelling of these names, and hence in their significance. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Müllenhoff suspects stanzas 37⁠–⁠41 to have been interpolated, and Edzardi thinks they may have come from the <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>. Snorri closely paraphrases stanzas 37⁠–⁠39, and quotes 40⁠–⁠41. <dfn>Arvak</dfn> (“Early Waker”) and <dfn>Alsvith</dfn> (“All-Swift”): the horses of the sun, named also in <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i>, 15. According to Snorri: “There was a man called Mundilfari, who had two children; they were so fair and lovely that he called his son Mani and his daughter Sol. The gods were angry at this presumption, and took the children and set them up in heaven; and they bade Sol drive the horses that drew the car of the sun which the gods had made to light the world from the sparks which flew out of Muspellsheim. The horses were called Alsvith and Arvak, and under their yokes the gods set two bellows to cool them, and in some songs these are called ‘the cold iron.’ ” <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Svalin</dfn> (“The Cooling”): the only other reference to this shield is in <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i>, 15. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Skoll</dfn> and <dfn>Hati</dfn>: the wolves that devour respectively the sun and moon. The latter is the son of Hrothvitnir (“The Mighty Wolf,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Fenrir); <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 40, and <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 46⁠–⁠47, in which Fenrir appears as the thief. <dfn>Ironwood</dfn>: a conjectural emendation of an obscure phrase; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 40. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This and the following stanza are quoted by Snorri. They seem to have come from a different source from the others of this poem; Edzardi suggests an older version of the <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>. This stanza is closely parallel to <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 21, which see, as also <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 3. Snorri, following this account, has a few details to add. The stones were made out of Ymir’s teeth and such of his bones as were broken. Mithgarth was a mountain-wall made out of Ymir’s eyebrows, and set around the earth because of the enmity of the giants. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With this stanza Othin gets back to his immediate situation, bound as he is between two fires. He calls down a blessing on the man who will reach into the fire and pull aside the great kettle which, in Icelandic houses, hung directly under the smoke-vent in the roof, and thus kept any one above from looking down into the interior. On <dfn>Ull</dfn>, the archer-god, <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 5 and note. He is specified here apparently for no better reason than that his name fits the initial-rhyme. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This and the following stanza are certainly interpolated, for they have nothing to do with the context, and stanza 45 continues the dramatic conclusion of the poem begun in stanza 42. This stanza is quoted by Snorri. <dfn>Ivaldi</dfn> (“The Mighty”): he is known only as the father of the craftsmen-dwarfs who made not only the ship Skithblathnir, but also Othin’s spear Gungnir, and the golden hair for Thor’s wife, Sif, after Loki had maliciously cut her own hair off. <dfn>Skithblathnir</dfn>: this ship (“Wooden-Bladed”) always had a fair wind, whenever the sail was set; it could be folded up at will and put in the pocket. <dfn>Freyr</dfn>: concerning him and his father, see <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 21, note, and <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, introductory prose and note. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri quotes this stanza. Like stanza 43 an almost certain interpolation, it was probably drawn in by the reference to Skithblathnir in the stanza interpolated earlier. It is presumably in faulty condition. One <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Ms.</abbr> has after the fifth line half of a sixth⁠—“Brimir of swords.” <dfn>Yggdrasil</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanzas 25⁠–⁠35. <dfn>Skithblathnir</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 43, note. <dfn>Sleipnir</dfn>: Othin’s eight-legged horse, one of Loki’s numerous progeny, borne by him to the stallion Svathilfari. This stallion belonged to the giant who built a fortress for the gods, and came so near to finishing it, with Svathilfari’s aid, as to make the gods fear he would win his promised reward⁠—Freyja and the sun and moon. To delay the work, Loki turned himself into a mare, whereupon the stallion ran away, and the giant failed to complete his task within the stipulated time. <dfn>Bilrost</dfn>: probably another form of Bifrost (which Snorri has in his version of the stanza), on which <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 29. <dfn>Bragi</dfn>: the god of poetry. He is one of the later figures among the gods, and is mentioned only three times in the poems of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i>. In Snorri’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i>, however, he is of great importance. His wife is Ithun, goddess of youth. Perhaps the Norwegian skald Bragi Boddason, the oldest recorded skaldic poet, had been traditionally apotheosized as early as the tenth century. <dfn>Hobrok</dfn>: nothing further is known of him. <dfn>Garm</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 44. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With this stanza the narrative current of the poem is resumed. <dfn>Ægir</dfn>: the sea-god; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, introductory prose. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Concerning the condition of stanzas 46⁠–⁠50, quoted by Snorri, nothing definite can be said. Lines and entire stanzas of this “catalogue” sort undoubtedly came and went with great freedom all through the period of oral transmission. Many of the names are not mentioned elsewhere, and often their significance is sheer guesswork. As in nearly every episode Othin appeared in disguise, the number of his names was necessarily almost limitless. <dfn>Grim</dfn>: “The Hooded.” <dfn>Gangleri</dfn>: “The Wanderer.” <dfn>Herjan</dfn>: “The Ruler.” <dfn>Hjalmberi</dfn>: “The Helmet-Bearer.” <dfn>Thekk</dfn>: “The Much-Loved.” <dfn>Thrithi</dfn>: “The Third” (in Snorri’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i> the stories are all told in the form of answers to questions, the speakers being Har, Jafnhar and Thrithi. Just what this tripartite form of Othin signifies has been the source of endless debate. Probably this line is late enough to betray the somewhat muddled influence of early Christianity.) <dfn>Thuth</dfn> and <dfn>Uth</dfn>: both names defy guesswork. <dfn>Helblindi</dfn>: “Hel-Blinder” (two manuscripts have Herblindi⁠—“Host-Blinder”). <dfn>Hor</dfn>: “The High One.” <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sath</dfn>: “The Truthful.” <dfn>Svipal</dfn>: “The Changing.” <dfn>Sanngetal</dfn>: “The Truth-Teller.” <dfn>Herteit</dfn>: “Glad of the Host.” <dfn>Hnikar</dfn>: “The Overthrower.” <dfn>Bileyg</dfn>: “The Shifty-Eyed.” <dfn>Baleyg</dfn>: “The Flaming-Eyed.” <dfn>Bolverk</dfn>: “Doer of Ill” (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, 104 and note). <dfn>Fjolnir</dfn>: “The Many-Shaped.” <dfn>Grimnir</dfn>: “The Hooded.” <dfn>Glapsvith</dfn>: “Swift in Deceit.” <dfn>Fjolsvith</dfn>: “Wide of Wisdom.” <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sithhott</dfn>: “With Broad Hat.” <dfn>Sithskegg</dfn>: “Long-Bearded.” <dfn>Sigfather</dfn>: “Father of Victory.” <dfn>Hnikuth</dfn>: “Overthrower.” <dfn>Valfather</dfn>: “Father of the Slain.” <dfn>Atrith</dfn>: “The Rider.” <dfn>Farmatyr</dfn>: “Helper of Cargoes” (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, god of sailors). <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nothing is known of Asmund, of Othin’s appearance as Jalk, or of the occasion when he “went in a sledge” as Kjalar (“Ruler of Keels”?). <dfn>Thror</dfn> and <dfn>Vithur</dfn> are also of uncertain meaning. <dfn>Oski</dfn>: “God of Wishes.” <dfn>Biflindi</dfn>: the manuscripts vary widely in the form of this name. <dfn>Jafnhor</dfn>: “Equally High” (<abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 46). <dfn>Omi</dfn>: “The Shouter.” <dfn>Gondlir</dfn>: “Wand-Bearer.” <dfn>Harbarth</dfn>: “Graybeard” (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, introduction). <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nothing further is known of the episode here mentioned. Sokkmimir is presumably Mithvitnir’s son. Snorri quotes the names Svithur and Svithrir, but omits all the remainder of the stanza. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Again the poem returns to the direct action, Othin addressing the terrified Geirröth. The manuscripts show no lacuna. Some editors supply a second line from paper manuscripts: “Greatly by me art beguiled.” <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Ygg</dfn>: Othin (“The Terrible”). <dfn>The maids</dfn>: the three Norns. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Possibly out of place, and probably more or less corrupt. <dfn>Thund</dfn>: “The Thunderer.” <dfn>Vak</dfn>: “The Wakeful.” <dfn>Skilfing</dfn>: “The Shaker.” <dfn>Vofuth</dfn>: “The Wanderer.” <dfn>Hroptatyr</dfn>: “Crier of the Gods.” <dfn>Gaut</dfn>: “Father.” <dfn>Ofnir</dfn> and <dfn>Svafnir</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 34. <a href="grimnismol.xhtml#noteref-212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Skirnismol -->
				<li id="note-213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Freyr</dfn>: concerning his father, Njorth, and the race of the Wanes in general, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 21 and note. Snorri thus describes Njorth’s family: “Njorth begat two children in Noatun; the son was named Freyr, and the daughter Freyja; they were fair of aspect and mighty. Freyr is the noblest of the gods; he rules over rain and sunshine, and therewith the fruitfulness of the earth; it is well to call upon him for plenty and welfare, for he rules over wealth for mankind. Freyja is the noblest of the goddesses. When she rides to the fight, she has one-half of the slain, and Othin has half. When she goes on a journey, she drives her two cats, and sits in a cart. Love-songs please her well, and it is good to call on her in love-matters.” <dfn>Hlithskjolf</dfn>: Othin’s watchtower; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, introductory prose. <dfn>He said</dfn>: both manuscripts have “Then Skathi said:” (Skathi was Njorth’s wife), but Bugge’s emendation, based on Snorri’s version, is doubtless correct. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>My son</dfn>: both manuscripts, and many editors, have “our son,” which, of course, goes with the introduction of Skathi in the prose. As the stanza is clearly addressed to Skirnir, the change of pronouns seems justified. The same confusion occurs in stanza 2, where Skirnir in the manuscripts is made to speak of Freyr as “your son” (plural). The plural pronoun in the original involves a metrical error, which is corrected by the emendation. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Elfbeam</dfn>: the sun, so called because its rays were fatal to elves and dwarfs; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Alvissmol</i>, 35. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gymir</dfn>: a mountain-giant, husband of Aurbotha, and father of Gerth, fairest among women. This is all Snorri tells of him in his paraphrase of the story. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri’s paraphrase of the poem is sufficiently close so that his addition of another sentence to Freyr’s speech makes it probable that a stanza has dropped out between 7 and 8. This has been tentatively reconstructed, thus:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Hither to me</span>
								<span>shalt thou bring the maid,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And home shalt thou lead her here,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>If her father wills it</span>
								<span>or wills it not,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And good reward shalt thou get.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Finn Magnusen detected the probable omission of a stanza here as early as 1821. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The sword</dfn>: Freyr’s gift of his sword to Skirnir eventually proves fatal, for at the last battle, when Freyr is attacked by Beli, whom he kills barehanded, and later when the fire-demon, Surt, slays him in turn, he is weaponless; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 53 and note. <dfn>Against the giants grim</dfn>: the condition of this line makes it seem like an error in copying, and it is possible that it should be identical with the fourth line of the next stanza. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors reject line 3 as spurious. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 2 is in neither manuscript, and no gap is indicated. I have followed Grundtvig’s conjectural emendation. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza is almost exactly like many in the first part of the <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, and may well have been a separate proverb. After this stanza the scene shifts to the interior of the house. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap indicated in either manuscript. Bugge and Niedner have attempted emendations, while Hildebrand suggests that the last two lines of stanza 14 are spurious, 14, 1⁠–⁠2, and 15 thus forming a single stanza, which seems doubtful. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Brother’s slayer</dfn>: perhaps the brother is Beli, slain by Freyr; the only other references are in <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 53, and in Snorri’s paraphrase of the <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, which merely says that Freyr’s gift of his sword to Skirnir “was the reason why he was weaponless when he met Beli, and he killed him barehanded.” Skirnir himself seems never to have killed anybody. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Wise Wanes</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 21 and note. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Arnamagnæan Codex</i> omits this stanza. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Apples</dfn>: the apple was the symbol of fruitfulness, and also of eternal youth. According to Snorri, the goddess Ithun had charge of the apples which the gods ate whenever they felt themselves growing old. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Ring</dfn>: the ring Draupnir (“Dropper”) was made by the dwarfs for Othin, who laid it on Baldr’s pyre when the latter’s corpse was burned (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 32 and note, and <i xml:lang="non">Baldrs Draumar</i>). Baldr, however, sent the ring back to Othin from hell. How Freyr obtained it is nowhere stated. Andvari’s ring (Andvaranaut) had a similar power of creating gold; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i>, prose after stanza 4 and note. Lines 3 and 4 of this stanza, and the first two of stanza 22, are missing in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Arnamagnæan Codex</i>. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first two lines are abbreviated in both manuscripts. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With this stanza, bribes and threats having failed, Skirnir begins a curse which, by the power of his magic staff, is to fall on Gerth if she refuses Freyr. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Eagle’s hill</dfn>: the hill at the end of heaven, and consequently overlooking hell, where the giant Hræsvelg sits “in an eagle’s guise,” and makes the winds with his wings; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 37, also <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 50. The second line is faulty in both manuscripts; Hildebrand’s emendation corrects the error, but omits an effective touch; the manuscript line may be rendered “And look and hanker for hell.” The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Arnamagnæan Codex</i> breaks off with the fourth line of this stanza. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hrimnir</dfn>: a frost-giant, mentioned elsewhere only in <i xml:lang="non">Hyndluljoth</i>, 33. Line 3 is probably spurious. <dfn>Watchman of the gods</dfn>: Heimdall; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 46. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Three nouns of doubtful meaning, which I have rendered <dfn>rage</dfn>, <dfn>longing</dfn>, and <dfn>heart</dfn> respectively, make the precise force of this stanza obscure. Niedner and Sijmons mark the entire stanza as interpolated, and Jonsson rejects line 5. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> and in nearly all the editions the first two lines of this stanza are followed by lines 3⁠–⁠5 of stanza 35. I have followed Niedner, Sijmons, and Gering. The two words here translated <dfn>vile things</dfn> are obscure; Gering renders the phrase simply “Kobolde.” <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The confusion noted as to the preceding stanza, and a metrical error in the third line, have led to various rearrangements and emendations; line 3 certainly looks like an interpolation. <dfn>Three-headed giants</dfn>: concerning giants with numerous heads, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 33, and <i xml:lang="non">Hymiskvitha</i>, 8. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-234" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-235" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap indicated in the manuscript; Niedner makes the line here given as 4 the first half of line 3, and fills out the stanza thus:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“with which I will tame you,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Maid, to work my will.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The whole stanza seems to be either interpolated or out of place; it would fit better after stanza 25. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-235" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-236" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jonsson marks this stanza as interpolated. The word translated <dfn>most evil</dfn> is another case of guesswork. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-236" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Most editors reject line 3 as spurious, and some also reject line 6. Lines 2 and 3 may have been expanded out of a single line running approximately “Ye gods and Suttung’s sons.” <dfn>Suttung</dfn>: concerning this giant <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, 104 and note. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-237" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-238" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Most editors combine lines 1⁠–⁠2 with stanza 36 (either with the first two lines thereof or the whole stanza), as lines 3⁠–⁠5 stand in the manuscript after line 2 of stanza 30. <dfn>Hrimgrimnir</dfn> (“The Frost-Shrouded”): a giant not elsewhere mentioned. Line 5, as a repetition of line 4, is probably a later addition. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-238" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the combination of this stanza with the preceding one, <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 35. The scribe clearly did not consider that the stanza began with line 1, as the first word thereof in the manuscript does not begin with a capital letter and has no period before it. The first word of line 3, however, is so marked. Line 5 may well be spurious. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-239" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Again the scribe seems to have been uncertain as to the stanza divisions. This time the first line is preceded by a period, but begins with a small letter. Many editors have made line 2 into two half-lines. <dfn>A charm</dfn>: literally, the rune Thurs (þ); the runic letters all had magic attributes; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i>, 6⁠–⁠7 and notes. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-240" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-241" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Barri</dfn>: “The Leafy.” <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-241" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Abbreviated to initial letters in the manuscript. <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-242" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-243" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The superscription is lacking in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i>. Snorri quotes this one stanza in his prose paraphrase, <i xml:lang="non">Gylfaginning</i>, chapter 37. The two versions are substantially the same, except that Snorri makes the first line read,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Long is one night,</span>
								<span>long is the second.” <a href="skirnismol.xhtml#noteref-243" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<!-- Harbarthsljoth -->
				<li id="note-244" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Harbarth</dfn> (“Graybeard”): Othin. On the nature of the prose notes found in the manuscripts, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, introduction. <dfn>Thor</dfn>: the journeys of the thunder-god were almost as numerous as those of Othin; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Thrymskvitha</i> and <i xml:lang="non">Hymiskvitha</i>. Like the Robin Hood of the British ballads, Thor was often temporarily worsted, but always managed to come out ahead in the end. His “Journey in the East” is presumably the famous episode, related in full by Snorri, in the course of which he encountered the giant Skrymir, and in the house of Utgartha-Loki lifted the cat which turned out to be Mithgarthsorm. The <i xml:lang="non">Hymiskvitha</i> relates a further incident of this journey. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-244" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-245" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The superscriptions to the speeches are badly confused in the manuscripts, but editors have agreed fairly well as to where they belong. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-245" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From the fact that in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> line 3 begins with a capital letter, it is possible that lines 3⁠–⁠4 constitute the ferryman’s reply, with something lost before stanza 4. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-246" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Thy mother</dfn>: Jorth (Earth). <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-247" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors assume a lacuna after this stanza. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-248" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-249" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Three good dwellings</dfn>: this has been generally assumed to mean three separate establishments, but it may refer simply to the three parts of a single farm, the dwelling proper, the cattle-barn and the storehouse; <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Thor is not even a respectable peasant. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-249" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-250" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hildolf</dfn> (“slaughtering wolf”): not elsewhere mentioned in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i>. <dfn>Rathsey</dfn> (“Isle of Counsel”): likewise not mentioned elsewhere. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-250" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-251" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>In danger</dfn>: Thor is “sekr,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, without the protection of any law, so long as he is in the territory of his enemies, the giants. <dfn>Meili</dfn>: a practically unknown son of Othin, mentioned here only in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i>. <dfn>Magni</dfn>: son of Thor and the giantess Jarnsaxa; after Thor’s fight with Hrungnir (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 14, note) Magni, though but three days old, was the only one of the gods strong enough to lift the dead giant’s foot from Thor’s neck. After rescuing his father, Magni said to him: “There would have been little trouble, father, had I but come sooner; I think I should have sent this giant to hell with my fist if I had met him first.” Magni and his brother, Mothi, inherit Thor’s hammer. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-251" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-252" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza is hopelessly confused as to form, but none of the editorial rearrangements have materially altered the meaning. <dfn>Doomed to die</dfn>: the word “feigr” occurs constantly in the Old Norse poems and sagas; the idea of an inevitable but unknown fate seems to have been practically universal throughout the pre-Christian period. On the concealment of names from enemies, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>, prose after stanza 1. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-252" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-253" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza, like the preceding one, is peculiarly chaotic in the manuscript, and has been variously emended. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-253" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-254" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hrungnir</dfn>: this giant rashly wagered his head that his horse, Gullfaxi, was swifter than Othin’s Sleipnir. In the race, which Hrungnir lost, he managed to dash uninvited into the home of the gods, where he became very drunk. Thor ejected him, and accepted his challenge to a duel. Hrungnir, terrified, had a helper made for him in the form of a dummy giant nine miles high and three miles broad. Hrungnir himself had a three-horned heart of stone and a head of stone; his shield was of stone and his weapon was a grindstone. But Thjalfi, Thor’s servant, told him the god would attack him out of the ground, wherefore Hrungnir laid down his shield and stood on it. The hammer Mjollnir shattered both the grindstone and Hrungnir’s head, but part of the grindstone knocked Thor down, and the giant fell with his foot on Thor’s neck (<abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 9). Meanwhile Thjalfi dispatched the dummy giant without trouble. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-254" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Fjolvar</dfn>: not elsewhere mentioned in the poems; perhaps the father of the “seven sisters” referred to in stanza 18. <dfn>Algrön</dfn> “The All-Green”: not mentioned elsewhere in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i>. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-255" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-256" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thor is always eager for stories of this sort; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanzas 31 and 33. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-256" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 1⁠–⁠2 are obscure, but apparently Harbarth means that the women were wise to give in to him cheerfully, resistance to his power being as impossible as (lines 3⁠–⁠4) making ropes of sand or digging the bottoms out of the valleys. Nothing further is known of these unlucky “seven sisters.” <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-257" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Thjazi</dfn>: this giant, by a trick, secured possession of the goddess Ithun and her apples (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, 19, note), and carried her off into Jotunheim. Loki, through whose fault she had been betrayed, was sent after her by the gods. He went in Freyja’s “hawk’s-dress” (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Thrymskvitha</i>, 3), turned Ithun into a nut, and flew back with her. Thjazi, in the shape of an eagle, gave chase. But the gods kindled a fire which burnt the eagle’s wings, and then they killed him. Snorri’s prose version does not attribute this feat particularly to Thor. Thjazi’s daughter was Skathi, whom the gods permitted to marry Njorth as a recompense for her father’s death. <dfn>Alvaldi</dfn>: of him we know only that he was the father of Thjazi, Ithi and Gang, who divided his wealth, each taking a mouthful of gold. The name is variously spelled. It is not known which stars were called “Thjazi’s Eyes.” In the middle of line 4 begins the fragmentary version of the poem found in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Arnamagnæan Codex</i>. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-258" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Riders by night</dfn>: witches, who were supposed to ride on wolves in the dark. Nothing further is known of this adventure. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-259" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-260" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The oak, etc</dfn>.: this proverb is found elsewhere (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr>, <i xml:lang="non">Grettissaga</i>) in approximately the same words. Its force is much like our “to the victor belong the spoils.” <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-260" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thor killed no women of the giants’ race on the “journey to the East” so fully described by Snorri, his great giant-killing adventure being the one narrated in the <i xml:lang="non">Thrymskvitha</i>. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-261" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-262" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Valland</dfn>: this mythical place (“Land of Slaughter”) is elsewhere mentioned, but not further characterized; <abbr>cf.</abbr> prose introduction to <i xml:lang="non">Völundarkvitha</i>, and <i xml:lang="non">Helreith Brynhildar</i>, 2. On the bringing of slain heroes to Othin, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 31 and note, and, for a somewhat different version, <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 14. Nowhere else is it indicated that Thor has an asylum for dead peasants. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-262" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reference here is to one of the most familiar episodes in Thor’s eastward journey. He and his companions came to a house in the forest, and went in to spend the night. Being disturbed by an earthquake and a terrific noise, they all crawled into a smaller room opening from the main one. In the morning, however, they discovered that the earthquake had been occasioned by the giant Skrymir’s lying down near them, and the noise by his snoring. The house in which they had taken refuge was his glove, the smaller room being the thumb. Skrymir was in fact Utgartha-Loki himself. That he is in this stanza called Fjalar (the name occurs also in <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, 14) is probably due to a confusion of the names by which Utgartha-Loki went. Loki taunts Thor with this adventure in <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, 60 and 62, line 3 of this stanza being perhaps interpolated from <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, 60, 4. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-263" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-264" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The river</dfn>: probably Ifing, which flows between the land of the gods and that of the giants; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 16. <dfn>Sons of Svarang</dfn>: presumably the giants; Svarang is not elsewhere mentioned in the poems, nor is there any other account of Thor’s defense of the passage. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-264" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Othin’s adventures of this sort were too numerous to make it possible to identify this particular person. <dfn>By stealth</dfn>: so the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Arnamagnæan Codex</i>; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i>, followed by several editors, has “long meeting with her.” <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-265" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Heel-biter</dfn>: this effective parallel to our “backbiter” is not found elsewhere in Old Norse. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-266" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-267" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hlesey</dfn>: “the Island of the Sea-God” (Hler = Ægir), identified with the Danish island Läsö, in the Kattegat. It appears again, much out of place, in <i xml:lang="non">Oddrunargratr</i>, 28. <dfn>Berserkers</dfn>: originally men who could turn themselves into bears, hence the name, “bear-shirts”; <abbr>cf.</abbr> the werewolf or loupgarou. Later the name was applied to men who at times became seized with a madness for bloodshed; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hyndluljoth</i>, 23 and note. The women here mentioned are obviously of the earlier type. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-267" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Thjalfi</dfn>: Thor’s servant; <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 14. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-268" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To what expedition this refers is unknown, but apparently Othin speaks of himself as allied to the foes of the gods. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-269" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hatred</dfn>: so <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i>; the other manuscript has, apparently, “sickness.” <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-270" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Just what Othin means, or why his words should so have enraged Thor, is not evident, though he may imply that Thor is open to bribery. Perhaps a passage has dropped out before stanza 43. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-271" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-272" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Othin refers to the dead, from whom he seeks information through his magic power. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-272" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-273" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sif</dfn>: Thor’s wife, the lover being presumably <dfn>Loki</dfn>; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, 54. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-273" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-274" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Asathor</dfn>: Thor goes by various names in the poems: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr>, Vingthor, Vingnir, Hlorrithi. Asathor means “Thor of the Gods.” <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-274" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-275" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Magni</dfn>: Thor’s son; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 9 and note. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-275" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-276" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Line 2</dfn>: the phrases mean simply “a long way”; <abbr>cf.</abbr> “over stock and stone.” <dfn>Verland</dfn>: the “Land of Men” to which Thor must come from the land of the giants. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Arnamagnæan Codex</i> has “Valland” (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 24 and note), but this is obviously an error. <dfn>Fjorgyn</dfn>: a feminine form of the same name, which belongs to Othin (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 56 and note); here it evidently means Jorth (Earth), Thor’s mother. <dfn>The road</dfn>: the rainbow bridge, Bifrost; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 29 and note. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-276" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-277" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Line 2</dfn>: so <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i>; the other manuscript has “ere sunrise.” <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-277" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-278" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Arnamagnæan Codex</i> clearly indicates Harbarth as the speaker of this line, but <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> has no superscription, and begins the line with a small letter not preceded by a period, thereby assigning it to Thor. <a href="harbarthsljoth.xhtml#noteref-278" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Hymiskvitha -->
				<li id="note-279" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Twigs</dfn>: Vigfusson comments at some length on “the rite practised in the heathen age of inquiring into the future by dipping bunches of chips or twigs into the blood (of sacrifices) and shaking them.” But the two operations may have been separate, the twigs being simply “divining-rods” marked with runes. In either case, the gods were seeking information by magic as to where they could find plenty to drink. <dfn>Ægir</dfn>: a giant who is also the god of the sea; little is known of him outside of what is told here and in the introductory prose to the <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, though Snorri has a brief account of him, giving his home as Hlesey (Läsö, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 37). <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 45, has a reference to this same feast. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-279" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-280" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Mountain-dweller</dfn>: the giant (Ægir). <dfn>Line 2</dfn>: the principal word in the original has defied interpretation, and any translation of the line must be largely guesswork. <dfn>Ygg</dfn>: Othin; his son is Thor. Some editors assume a gap after this stanza. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-280" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-281" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Word-wielder</dfn>: Thor. <dfn>The giant</dfn>: Ægir. <dfn>Sif</dfn>: Thor’s wife; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 48. <dfn>The kettle</dfn>: Ægir’s kettle is possibly the sea itself. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-281" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-282" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Tyr</dfn>: the god of battle; his two great achievements were thrusting his hand into the mouth of the wolf Fenrir so that the gods might bind him, whereby he lost his hand (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 39, note), and his fight with the hound Garm in the last battle, in which they kill each other. <dfn>Hlorrithi</dfn>: Thor. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-282" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-283" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Elivagar</dfn> (“Stormy Waves”): possibly the Milky Way; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 31, note. <dfn>Hymir</dfn>: this giant figures only in this episode. It is not clear why Tyr, who is elsewhere spoken of as a son of Othin, should here call Hymir his father. Finnur Jonsson, in an attempt to get round this difficulty, deliberately changed the word “father” to “grandfather,” but this does not help greatly. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-283" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-284" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Neither manuscript has any superscriptions, but most editors have supplied them as above. From this point through stanza 11 the editors have varied considerably in grouping the lines into stanzas. The manuscripts indicate the third lines of stanzas 7, 8, 9, and 10 as beginning stanzas, but this makes more complications than the present arrangement. It is possible that, as Sijmons suggests, two lines have been lost after stanza 6. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-284" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-285" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Egil</dfn>: possibly, though by no means certainly, the father of Thor’s servant, Thjalfi, for, according to Snorri, Thor’s first stop on this journey was at the house of a peasant whose children, Thjalfi and Roskva, he took into his service; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 38, note. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Arnamagnæan Codex</i> has “Ægir” instead of “Egil,” but, aside from the fact that Thor had just left Ægir’s house, the sea-god can hardly have been spoken of as a goatherd. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-285" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-286" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The youth</dfn>: Tyr, whose extraordinary grandmother is Hymir’s mother. We know nothing further of her, or of <dfn>the other</dfn>, who is Hymir’s wife and Tyr’s mother. It may be guessed, however, that she belonged rather to the race of the gods than to that of the giants. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-286" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-287" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Two or three editors give this stanza a superscription (“The concubine spake,” “The daughter spake”). Line 3 is commonly regarded as spurious. <dfn>The foeman of Hroth</dfn>: of course this means Thor, but nothing is known of any enemy of his by this name. Several editors have sought to make a single word meaning “the famous enemy” out of the phrase. Concerning Thor as the friend of man, particularly of the peasant class, <abbr>cf.</abbr> introduction to <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>. <dfn>Veur</dfn>: another name, of uncertain meaning, for Thor. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-287" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-288" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Eight</dfn>: the giant’s glance, besides breaking the beam, knocks down all the kettles with such violence that all but the one under which Thor and Tyr are hiding are broken. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-288" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-289" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hymir’s wrath does not permit him to ignore the duties of a host to his guests, always strongly insisted on. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-289" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-290" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thor’s appetite figures elsewhere; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Thrymskvitha</i>, 24. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-290" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-291" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The comrade of Hrungnir</dfn>: Hymir, presumably simply because both are giants; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 14 and note. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-291" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-292" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscripts indicate no lacuna, and many editors unite stanza 17 with lines 1 and 2 of 18. Sijmons and Gering assume a gap after these two lines, but it seems more probable that the missing passage, if any, belonged before them, supplying the connection with the previous stanza. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-292" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-293" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscripts have no superscription. Many editors combine lines 3 and 4 with lines 1 and 2 of stanza 19. In Snorri’s extended paraphrase of the story, Hymir declines to go fishing with Thor on the ground that the latter is too small a person to be worth bothering about. “You would freeze,” he says, “if you stayed out in mid-ocean as long as I generally do.” <dfn>Bait</dfn> (line 4): the word literally means “chaff,” hence any small bits; Hymir means that Thor should collect dung for bait. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-293" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-294" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many editors combine lines 3 and 4 with stanza 20. <dfn>Fortress</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: the ox’s head; <abbr>cf.</abbr> introductory note concerning the diction of this poem. Several editors assume a lacuna after stanza 19, but this seems unnecessary. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-294" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-295" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscripts have no superscription. <dfn>Steerer of ships</dfn>: probably merely a reference to Thor’s intention to go fishing. The lacuna after stanza 20 is assumed by most editors. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-295" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-296" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Lord of the goats</dfn>: Thor, because of his goat-drawn chariot. <dfn>Ape-begotten</dfn>: Hymir; the word “api,” rare until relatively late times in its literal sense, is fairly common with the meaning of “fool.” Giants were generally assumed to be stupid. <dfn>Steed of the rollers</dfn>: a ship, because boats were pulled up on shore by means of rollers. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-296" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-297" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Warder of men</dfn>: Thor; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 11. <dfn>Worm’s destroyer</dfn>: likewise Thor, who in the last battle slays, and is slain by, Mithgarthsorm; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 56. <dfn>The foe of the gods</dfn>: Mithgarthsorm, who lies in the sea, and surrounds the whole earth. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-297" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-298" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hill of the hair</dfn>: head⁠—a thoroughly characteristic skaldic phrase. <dfn>Brother of Fenrir</dfn>: Mithgarthsorm was, like the wolf Fenrir and the goddess Hel, born to Loki and the giantess Angrbotha (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 39 and note), and I have translated this line accordingly; but the word used in the text has been guessed as meaning almost anything from “comrade” to “enemy.” <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-298" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-299" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap is indicated in the manuscripts, but that a line or more has been lost is highly probable. In Snorri’s version, Thor pulls so hard on the line that he drives both his feet through the flooring of the boat, and stands on bottom. When he pulls the serpent up, Hymir cuts the line with his bait-knife, which explains the serpent’s escape. Thor, in a rage, knocks Hymir overboard with his hammer, and then wades ashore. The lines of stanzas 25 and 26 have been variously grouped. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-299" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-300" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap is indicated in the manuscripts, but line 2 begins with a small letter. <dfn>A second wind</dfn>: another direction, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, he put about for the shore. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-300" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-301" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No superscription in the manuscripts. In its place Bugge supplies a line⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“These words spake Hymir,</span>
								<span>the giant wise.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The manuscripts reverse the order of lines 2 and 3, and in both of them line 4 stands after stanza 28. <dfn>Goat of the flood</dfn>: boat. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-301" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-302" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sea-horse</dfn>: boat. <dfn>Surf-swine</dfn>: the whales. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-302" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-303" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri says nothing of this episode of Hymir’s cup. The glass which cannot be broken appears in the folklore of various races. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-303" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-304" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The loved one</dfn>: Hymir’s wife and Tyr’s mother; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 8 and note. The idea that a giant’s skull is harder than stone or anything else is characteristic of the later Norse folk-stories, and in one of the so-called “mythical sagas” we find a giant actually named Hard-Skull. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-304" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-305" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Helmet-stem</dfn>: head. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-305" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-306" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscripts have no superscription. Line 4 in the manuscripts is somewhat obscure, and Bugge, followed by some editors, suggests a reading which may be rendered (beginning with the second half of line 3):</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span/>
								<span>“No more can I speak</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>Ever again</span>
								<span>as I spoke of old.” <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-306" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-307" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The father of Mothi</dfn> and <dfn>Sif’s husband</dfn>: Thor. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-307" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-308" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The many-headed</dfn>: The giants, although rarely designated as a race in this way, sometimes had two or more heads; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 8, <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, 31 and <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 33. Hymir’s mother is, however, the only many-headed giant actually to appear in the action of the poems, and it is safe to assume that the tradition as a whole belongs to the period of Norse folktales of the <i xml:lang="de">märchen</i> order. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-308" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-309" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap is indicated in the manuscripts. Some editors put the missing line as 2, some as 3, and some, leaving the present three lines together, add a fourth, and metrically incorrect, one from late paper manuscripts:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Who with Hymir</span>
								<span>followed after.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><dfn>Whales of the waste</dfn>: giants. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-309" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-310" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to Snorri, when Thor set out with Loki (not Tyr) for the giants’ land, he stopped first at a peasant’s house (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 7 and note). There he proceeded to cook his own goats for supper. The peasant’s son, Thjalfi, eager to get at the marrow, split one of the leg-bones with his knife. The next morning, when Thor was ready to proceed with his journey, he called the goats to life again, but one of them proved irretrievably lame. His wrath led the peasant to give him both his children as servants (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 39). Snorri does not indicate that Loki was in any way to blame. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-310" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-311" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This deliberate introduction of the storyteller is exceedingly rare in the older poetry. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-311" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-312" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The translation of the last two lines is mostly guesswork, as the word rendered “gods” is uncertain, and the one rendered “at the autumn-time” is quite obscure. <a href="hymiskvitha.xhtml#noteref-312" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Lokasenna -->
				<li id="note-313" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Ægir</dfn>: the sea-god; Snorri gives Hler as another of his names, but he is not elsewhere called Gymir, which is the name of the giant, Gerth’s father, in the <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>. On Ægir <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 45, and <i xml:lang="non">Hymiskvitha</i>, 1. <dfn>Frigg</dfn>: though Othin’s wife is often mentioned, she plays only a minor part in the Eddic poems; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 34, <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 1, and <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, introductory prose. <dfn>Thor</dfn>: the compiler is apparently a trifle confused as to Thor’s movements; the “journey in the East” here mentioned cannot be the one described in the <i xml:lang="non">Hymiskvitha</i>, nor yet the one narrated by Snorri, as Loki was with Thor throughout that expedition. He probably means no more than that Thor was off killing giants. <dfn>Sif</dfn>: concerning Thor’s wife the chief incident is that Loki cut off her hair, and, at the command of the wrathful Thor, was compelled to have the dwarfs fashion her a new supply of hair out of gold; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 48. <dfn>Bragi</dfn>: the god of poetry; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 44 and note. <dfn>Ithun</dfn>: the goddess of youth; <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, 19. Ithun is not mentioned by name in any other of the Eddic poems, but Snorri tells in detail how the giant Thjazi stole her and her apples, explaining the reference in <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 19 (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">q. v.</abbr>). <dfn>Tyr</dfn>: the god of battle; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hymiskvitha</i>, 4, and (concerning his dealings with the wolf Fenrir) <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 39, note. <dfn>Njorth</dfn>: the chief of the Wanes, and father of <dfn>Freyr</dfn> and <dfn>Freyja</dfn>; <abbr>cf.</abbr> (concerning the whole family) <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, introductory prose and note, also <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 21 and note. <dfn>Skathi</dfn>: Njorth’s wife was the daughter of the giant Thjazi; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 19, note, and <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 11. <dfn>Vithar</dfn>: the silent god, the son of Othin who avenged his father by slaying the wolf Fenrir; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 54, <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 51, and <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 17. <dfn>Loki</dfn>: the mischief-making fire-god; in addition to the many references to his career in the <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, <abbr>cf.</abbr> particularly <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 32 and 35, and notes. <dfn>Byggvir</dfn> and <dfn>Beyla</dfn>: not mentioned elsewhere in the poems; Freyr’s conspicuous servant is Skirnir, hero of the <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>. <dfn>Fimafeng</dfn> (“The Swift Handler”) and <dfn>Eldir</dfn> (“The Man of the Fire”): mentioned only in connection with this incident. <dfn>Glittering gold</dfn>: Ægir’s use of gold to light his hall, which was often thought of as under the sea, was responsible for the phrase “flame of the flood,” and sundry kindred phrases, meaning “gold.” <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-313" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-314" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Lopt</dfn>: like Lothur (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 18) another name for Loki; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hyndluljoth</i>, 43, and Svipdagsmol, 42. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-314" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-315" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript this stanza begins with a small letter, and Heinzel unites it with stanza 6. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-315" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-316" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Bragi</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on introductory prose. Why Loki taunts him with cowardice (stanzas 11⁠–⁠13⁠–⁠15) is not clear, for poetry, of which Bragi was the patron, was generally associated in the Norse mind with peculiar valor, and most of the skaldic poets were likewise noted fighters. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-316" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-317" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There exists no account of any incident in which Othin and Loki thus swore blood-brotherhood, but they were so often allied in enterprises that the idea is wholly reasonable. The common process of “mingling blood” was carried out quite literally, and the promise of which Loki speaks is characteristic of those which, in the sagas, often accompanied the ceremony; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Brot af Sigurtharkvithu</i>, 18 and note. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-317" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-318" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In stanzas 10⁠–⁠31 the manuscript has nothing to indicate the identity of the several speakers, but these are uniformly clear enough through the context. <dfn>Vithar</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on introductory prose. <dfn>The wolf’s father</dfn>: Loki; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 39 and note. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-318" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-319" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sijmons makes one line of lines 4⁠–⁠5 by cutting out a part of each; Finnur Jonsson rejects 5 as spurious. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-319" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-320" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The text of line 4 is somewhat obscure, and has been variously emended, one often adopted suggestion making the line read, “Little is that for thy lies.” <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-320" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-321" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Adorner of benches</dfn>: this epithet presumably implies that Bragi is not only slothful, but also effeminate, for a very similar word, “pride of the benches,” means a bride. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-321" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-322" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Ithun</dfn>: Bragi’s wife; <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on introductory prose. The goddesses who, finding that their husbands are getting the worst of it, take up the cudgels with Loki, all find themselves confronted with undeniable facts in their own careers; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanzas 26 (Frigg), 52 (Skathi) and 54 (Sif). Gefjun and Freyja are silenced in similar fashion. <dfn>Wish-son</dfn>: adopted son; Loki was the son of the giant Farbauti and the giantess Laufey, and hence was not of the race of the gods, but had been virtually adopted by Othin, who subsequently had good reason to regret it. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-322" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-323" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We do not even know who Ithun’s brother was, much less who slew him. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-323" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-324" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gefjun</dfn>: a goddess, not elsewhere mentioned in the poems, who, according to Snorri, was served by the women who died maidens. Beyond this nothing is known of her. Lines 3⁠–⁠4 in the manuscript are puzzling, and have been freely emended. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-324" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-325" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nothing is known of the incident here mentioned. There is a good deal of confusion as to various of the gods and goddesses, and it has been suggested that Gefjun is really Frigg under another name, with a little of Freyja⁠—whose attributes were frequently confused with Frigg’s⁠—thrown in. Certainly Othin’s answer (stanza 21, lines 3⁠–⁠4) fits Frigg perfectly, for she shared his knowledge of the future, whereas it has no relation to anything known of Gefjun. As for the necklace (line 3), it may be the Brisings’ necklace, which appears in the <i xml:lang="non">Thrymskvitha</i> as Freyja’s, but which, in some mythological writings, is assigned to Frigg. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-325" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-326" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri quotes line 1; <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 29. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-326" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-327" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is no other reference to Loki’s having spent eight years underground, or to his cow-milking. On one occasion, however, he did bear offspring. A giant had undertaken to build the gods a fortress, his reward being Freyja and the sun and moon, provided the work was done by a given time. His sole helper was his horse, Svathilfari. The work being nearly done, and the gods fearing to lose Freyja and the sun and moon, Loki turned himself into a mare, and so effectually distracted Svathilfari from his task that shortly afterwards Loki gave birth to Othin’s eight-legged horse, Sleipnir. In such contests of abuse a man was not infrequently taunted with having borne children; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, 39⁠–⁠45. One or two of the last three lines may be spurious. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-327" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-328" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Samsey</dfn>: perhaps the Danish island of Samsö. Othin was the god of magic, but there is no other reference to his ever having disguised himself as a witch. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-328" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-329" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Frigg</dfn>: Othin’s wife; <abbr>cf.</abbr> note to introductory prose. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-329" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-330" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Fjorgyn</dfn>: Othin; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 56 and note. <dfn>Vili</dfn> and <dfn>Ve</dfn>: Othin’s brothers, who appear merely as, with Othin, the sons of Bur and Bestla; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 4. The <i xml:lang="non">Ynglingasaga</i> says that, during one of Othin’s protracted absences, his two brothers took Frigg as their mistress. <dfn>Vithrir</dfn>: another name for Othin. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-330" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-331" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the death of Baldr, slain through Loki’s cunning by the blind Hoth, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 32 and note. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-331" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-332" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Freyja</dfn>: daughter of Njorth and sister of Freyr; <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on introductory prose. Snorri, in speaking of Frigg’s knowledge of the future, makes a stanza out of <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, 21, 1; 47, 2; 29, 3⁠–⁠4, thus:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Mad art thou, Loki,</span>
								<span>and little of wit,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Why, Loki, leavst thou this not?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>The fate of all</span>
								<span>does Frigg know well,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Though herself she says it not.” <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-332" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-333" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to Snorri, Freyja was a model of fidelity to her husband, Oth. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-333" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-334" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Before each of stanzas 32⁠–⁠42 the manuscript indicates the speaker, through the initial letter of the name written in the margin. <dfn>Thy brother</dfn>: Freyr; there is no other indication that such a relation existed between these two, but they themselves were the product of such a union; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 36 and note. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-334" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-335" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Njorth</dfn>: father of Freyr and Freyja, and given by the Wanes as a hostage, in exchange for Hönir, at the close of the first war; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 21 and note, also <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, introductory prose and note. <dfn>Babes</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 23 and note. Bugge suggests that this clause may have been a late insertion. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-335" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-336" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Daughters of Hymir</dfn>: we have no clue to who these were, though Hymir is doubtless the frost-giant of the <i xml:lang="non">Hymiskvitha</i> (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">q.v.</abbr>). Loki’s point is that Njorth is not a god, but the product of an inferior race (the Wanes). <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-336" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-337" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The son</dfn>: Freyr. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-337" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-338" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Thy sister</dfn>: the <i xml:lang="non">Ynglingasaga</i> supports this story of Njorth’s having had two children by his sister before he came among the gods. Snorri, on the other hand, specifically says that Freyr and Freyja were born after Njorth came to the gods. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-338" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-339" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Tyr</dfn>: the god of battle; <abbr>cf.</abbr> notes on <i xml:lang="non">Hymiskvitha</i>, 4, and <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 39. <dfn>Freyr</dfn>; concerning his noble qualities <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, introductory prose and note. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-339" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-340" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri mentions Tyr’s incompetence as a peacemaker. <dfn>Fenrir</dfn>: the wolf, Loki’s son; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 39. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-340" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-341" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hrothvitnir</dfn> (“The Mighty Wolf”): Fenrir, who awaits in chains the final battle and death at the hands of Vithar. The manuscript has a metrical error in line 3, which has led to various emendations, all with much the same meaning. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-341" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-342" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Thy wife</dfn>: there is no other reference to Tyr’s wife, nor do we know who was the son in question. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-342" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-343" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The mouth of the river</dfn>: according to Snorri, the chained Fenrir “roars horribly, and the slaver runs from his mouth, and makes the river called Vam; he lies there till the doom of the gods.” Freyr’s threat is actually carried out; <abbr>cf.</abbr> concluding prose. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-343" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-344" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The daughter of Gymir</dfn>: Gerth, heroine of the <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, which gives the details of Freyr’s loss of his sword. <dfn>Muspell’s sons</dfn>: the name Muspell is not used elsewhere in the poems; Snorri uses it frequently, but only in this same phrase, “Muspell’s sons.” They are the dwellers in the fire-world, Muspellsheim, led by Surt against the gods in the last battle; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 47 and 52 and notes. <dfn>Myrkwood</dfn>: here the dark forest bounding the fire-world; in the <i xml:lang="non">Atlakvitha</i> (stanza 3) the name is used of another boundary forest. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-344" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-345" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Byggvir</dfn>: one of Freyr’s two servants; <abbr>cf.</abbr> introductory prose. <dfn>Ingunar-Freyr</dfn>: the name is not used elsewhere in the poems, or by Snorri; it may be the genitive of a woman’s name, Ingun, the unknown sister of Njorth who was Freyr’s mother (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 36), or a corruption of the name Ingw, used for Freyr (Fro) in old German mythology. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-345" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-346" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Beginning with this stanza, the names of the speakers are lacking in the manuscript. <dfn>The mill</dfn>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, at slaves’ tasks. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-346" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-347" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nothing further is known of either Byggvir’s swiftness or his cowardice. <dfn>Hropt</dfn>: Othin. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-347" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-348" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Heimdall</dfn>: besides being the watchman of the gods (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 27), he appears also as the god of light (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Thrymskvitha</i>, 14), and possibly also as a complex cultural deity in the <i xml:lang="non">Rigsthula</i>. He was a son of Othin, born of nine sisters; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hyndluljoth</i>, 37⁠–⁠40. In the last battle he and Loki slay one another. Line 2 is quoted by Snorri; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 29, note. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-348" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-349" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Skathi</dfn>: the wife of Njorth, and daughter of the giant Thjazi, concerning whose death <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 19, note. <dfn>Bowels</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: according to the prose note at the end of the <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, the gods bound Loki with the bowels of his son Vali, and changed his other son, Narfi, into a wolf. Snorri turns the story about, Vali being the wolf, who tears his brother to pieces, the gods then using Narfi’s intestines to bind Loki. Narfi⁠—and presumably Vali⁠—were the sons of Loki and his wife, Sigyn. They appear only in this episode, though Narfi (or Nari) is named by Snorri in his list of Loki’s children. <abbr>Cf.</abbr> concluding prose, and note. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-349" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-350" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Laufey’s son</dfn>: Loki; not much is known of his parents beyond their names. His father was the giant Farbauti, his mother Laufey, sometimes called Nal. There is an elaborate but farfetched hypothesis explaining these three on the basis of a nature-myth. There is no other reference to such a relation between Skathi and Loki as he here suggests. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-350" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-351" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sif</dfn>: Thor’s wife; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 48, where her infidelity is again mentioned. The manuscript omits the proper name from the preceding prose, and a few editors have, obviously in error, attributed the speech to Beyla. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-351" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-352" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hlorrithi</dfn>: Thor. Line 5 is probably spurious. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-352" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-353" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Beyla</dfn>: Freyr’s servant, wife of Byggvir; <abbr>cf.</abbr> introductory prose and note. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-353" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-354" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Mjollnir</dfn>: concerning Thor’s famous hammer see particularly <i xml:lang="non">Thrymskvitha</i>, 1 and note. <dfn>Shoulder-cliff</dfn>: head; concerning the use of such diction in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i>, <abbr>cf.</abbr> introductory note to <i xml:lang="non">Hymiskvitha</i>. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, but this is apparently a scribal error. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-354" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-355" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Son of Earth</dfn>: Thor, son of Othin and Jorth (Earth). The manuscript omits the word “son,” but all editors have agreed in supplying it. <dfn>The wolf</dfn>: Fenrir, Loki’s son, who slays Othin (<dfn>Sigfather</dfn>: “Father of Victory”) in the final battle. Thor, according to Snorri and to the <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 56, fights with Mithgarthsorm and not with Fenrir, who is killed by Vithar. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-355" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-356" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 1⁠–⁠2 are abbreviated in the manuscript, as also in stanzas 61 and 63. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-356" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-357" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Loki’s taunt that Thor hid in the thumb of Skrymir’s glove is similar to that of Othin, <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 26, in the note to which the story is outlined. Line 4 is identical with line 3 of <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 26. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-357" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-358" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hrungnir’s slayer</dfn>: the hammer; the story of how Thor slew this stone-headed giant is indicated in <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 14⁠–⁠15, and outlined in the note to stanza 14 of that poem. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-358" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-359" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the day following the adventure of the glove, Thor, Loki and Thor’s servants proceed on their way in company with Skrymir, who puts all their food in his wallet. At evening Skrymir goes to sleep, and Thor tries to get at the food, but cannot loosen the straps of the wallet. In a rage he smites Skrymir three times on the head with his hammer, but the giant⁠—who, it subsequently appears, deftly dodges the blows⁠—is totally undisturbed. Line 5 may well be spurious. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-359" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-360" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The flames</dfn>: the fire that consumes the world on the last day; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 57. Line 5 may be spurious. <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-360" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-361" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri tells the same story, with minor differences, but makes it the consequence of Loki’s part in the slaying of Baldr, which undoubtedly represents the correct tradition. The compiler of the poems either was confused or thought the incident was useful as indicating what finally happened to Loki. Possibly he did not mean to imply that Loki’s fate was brought upon him by his abuse of the gods, but simply tried to round out the story. <dfn>Franang</dfn>: “Gleaming Water.” <dfn>Vali</dfn> and <dfn>Narfi</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 49 and note. <dfn>Sigyn</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 35, the only other place where she is mentioned in the poems. Snorri omits the naive note about earthquakes, his narrative ending with the words, “And there he lies till the destruction of the gods.” <a href="lokasenna.xhtml#noteref-361" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Thrymskvitha -->
				<li id="note-362" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Vingthor</dfn> (“Thor the Hurler”): another name for Thor, equivalent to Vingnir (<i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 51). Concerning Thor and his hammer, Mjollnir, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hymiskvitha</i>, <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, and <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, passim. <dfn>Jorth</dfn>: Earth, Thor’s mother, Othin being his father. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-362" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-363" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Loki</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, passim. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-363" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-364" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Freyja</dfn>: Njorth’s daughter, and sister of Freyr; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, introductory prose and note, also <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, introductory prose. Freyja’s house was Sessrymnir (“Rich in Seats”) built in Folkvang (“Field of the Folk”); <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 14. <dfn>Feather-dress</dfn>: this flying equipment of Freyja’s is also used in the story of Thjazi, wherein Loki again borrows the “hawk’s dress” of Freyja, this time to rescue Ithun; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 19 and note. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-364" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-365" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript and most editions have lines 1⁠–⁠2 in inverse order. Several editors assume a lacuna before line 1, making a stanza out of the two conjectural lines (Bugge actually supplies them) and lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 4. Thus they either make a separate stanza out of lines 3⁠–⁠5 or unite them in a six-line stanza with 5. The manuscript punctuation and capitalization⁠—not wholly trustworthy guides⁠—indicate the stanza divisions as in this translation. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-365" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-366" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Thrym</dfn>: a frost-giant. Gering declares that this story of the theft of Thor’s hammer symbolizes the fact that thunderstorms rarely occur in winter. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-366" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-367" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Line 1</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 48, 1. The manuscript does not indicate Loki as the speaker of lines 3⁠–⁠4. <dfn>Hlorrithi</dfn>: Thor. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-367" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-368" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No superscription in the manuscript. Vigfusson made up and inserted lines like</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Then spake Loki</span>
								<span>the son of Laufey”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>whenever he thought they would be useful. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-368" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-369" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 2, instead of line 1, as the beginning of a stanza, which has caused editors some confusion in grouping the lines of stanzas 8 and 9. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-369" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-370" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No superscription in the manuscript. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-370" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-371" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many editors have rejected either line 2 or line 3. Vigfusson inserts one of his own lines before line 4. <dfn>Brisings’ necklace</dfn>: a marvelous necklace fashioned by the dwarfs, here called Brisings (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, “Twiners”); <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, 20 and note. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-371" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-372" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 1⁠–⁠3 are identical with <i xml:lang="non">Baldrs Draumar</i>, 1, 1⁠–⁠3. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-372" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-373" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Heimdall</dfn>: the phrase “whitest of the gods” suggests that Heimdall was the god of light as well as being the watchman. His wisdom was probably connected with his sleepless watching over all the worlds; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, 47 and note. On the Wanes <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 21 and note. They are not elsewhere spoken of as peculiarly gifted with knowledge of future events. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-373" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-374" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Possibly a line has been lost from this stanza. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-374" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-375" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Laufey</dfn>: Loki’s mother, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, 52 and note. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-375" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-376" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript abbreviates all six lines, giving only the initial letters of the words. The stanza division is thus arbitrary; some editors have made one stanza of the six lines, others have combined the last two lines of stanza 19 with stanza 20. It is possible that a couple of lines have been lost. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-376" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-377" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Goats</dfn>: Thor’s wagon was always drawn by goats; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hymiskvitha</i>, 38 and note. <dfn>Jotunheim</dfn>: the world of the giants. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-377" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-378" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Njorth</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 21, and <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 11 and 16. <dfn>Noatun</dfn> (“Ships’-Haven”): Njorth’s home, where his wife, Skathi, found it impossible to stay; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 11 and note. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-378" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-379" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Grundtvig thinks this is all that is left of two stanzas describing Thor’s supper. Some editors reject line 4. In line 3 the manuscript has “he,” the reference being, of course, to Thor, on whose appetite <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hymiskvitha</i>, 15. <dfn>Sif</dfn>: Thor’s wife; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, note to introductory prose and stanza 53. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-379" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-380" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For clearness I have inserted Thrym’s name in place of the pronoun of the original. <dfn>Fire</dfn>: the noun is lacking in the manuscript; most editors have inserted it, however, following a late paper manuscript. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-380" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-381" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript the whole stanza is abbreviated to initial letters, except for “sleep,” “Freyja,” and “found.” <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-381" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-382" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Luckless</dfn>: so the manuscript, but many editors have altered the word “arma” to “aldna,” meaning “old,” to correspond with line 1 of stanza 32. Line 5 may well be spurious. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-382" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-383" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hallow</dfn>: just what this means is not clear, but there are references to other kinds of consecration, though not of a bride, with the “sign of the hammer.” According to Vigfusson, “the hammer was the holy sign with the heathens, answering to the cross of the Christians.” In Snorri’s story of Thor’s resuscitation of his cooked goat (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hymiskvitha</i>, 38, note) the god “hallows” the goat with his hammer. One of the oldest runic signs, supposed to have magic power, was named Thor’s-hammer. <dfn>Vor</dfn>: the goddess of vows, particularly between men and women; Snorri lists a number of little-known goddesses similar to Vor, all of them apparently little more than names for Frigg. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-383" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-384" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors reject this line, which, from a dramatic standpoint, is certainly a pity. In the manuscript it begins with a capital letter, like the opening of a new stanza. <a href="thrymskvitha.xhtml#noteref-384" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Alvissmol -->
				<li id="note-385" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Alvis</dfn> (“All-Knowing”): a dwarf, not elsewhere mentioned. The manuscript nowhere indicates the speakers’ names. The bride in question is Thor’s daughter; Thruth (“Might”) is the only daughter of his whose name is recorded, and she does not appear elsewhere in the poems. Her mother was Sif, Thor’s wife, whereas the god’s sons were born of a giantess. <dfn>Benches</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, 15 and note. <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-385" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-386" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The dwarfs, living beyond the reach of the sun, which was fatal to them (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanzas 16 and 35), were necessarily pale. Line 3 is, of course, ironical. <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-386" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-387" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Wagon-guider</dfn>: Thor, who travels habitually on his goat-drawn wagon. Bugge changes “Vagna vers” to “Vapna verþs,” rendering the line</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“I am come to seek</span>
								<span>the cost of the weapons.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>In either case, Alvis does not as yet recognize Thor. <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-387" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-388" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apparently the gods promised Thor’s daughter in marriage to Alvis during her father’s absence, perhaps as a reward for some craftsmanship of his (<abbr>cf.</abbr> Bugge’s suggestion as to stanza 3). The text of line 4 is most uncertain. <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-388" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-389" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hero</dfn>: ironically spoken; Alvis takes Thor for a tramp, the god’s uncouth appearance often leading to such mistakes; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 6. Line 4 is a trifle uncertain; some editors alter the wording to read “What worthless woman bore thee?” <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-389" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-390" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Vingthor</dfn> (“Thor the Hurler”): <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Thrymskvitha</i>, 1. <dfn>Sithgrani</dfn> (“Long-Beard”): Othin. <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-390" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-391" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Every world</dfn>: concerning the nine worlds, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 2 and note. Many editors follow this stanza with one spoken by Alvis, found in late paper manuscripts, as follows:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Ask then, Vingthor,</span>
								<span>since eager thou art</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The lore of the dwarf to learn;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>Oft have I fared</span>
								<span>in the nine worlds all,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And wide is my wisdom of each.” <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-391" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-392" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Men</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: nothing could more clearly indicate the author’s mythological inaccuracy than his confusion of the inhabitants of the nine worlds. Men (dwellers in Mithgarth) appear in each of Alvis’s thirteen answers; so do the gods (Asgarth) and the giants (Jotunheim). The elves (Alfheim) appear in eleven answers, the Wanes (Vanaheim) in nine, and the dwarfs (who occupied no special world, unless one identifies them with the dark elves of Svartalfaheim) in seven. The dwellers “in hell” appear in six stanzas; the phrase probably refers to the world of the dead, though Mogk thinks it may mean the dwarfs. In stanzas where the gods are already listed appear names elsewhere applied only to them⁠—“holy ones,” “sons of the gods” and “high ones,”⁠—as if these names meant beings of a separate race. “Men” appears twice in the same stanza, and so do the giants, if one assumes that they are “the sons of Suttung.” Altogether it is useless to pay much attention to the mythology of Alvis’s replies. <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-392" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-393" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 1, 2, and 4 of Thor’s questions are regularly abbreviated in the manuscript. <dfn>Beheld</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: the word in the manuscript is almost certainly an error, and all kinds of guesses have been made to rectify it. All that can be said is that it means “beheld of” or “known to” somebody. <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-393" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-394" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Flame</dfn>: a doubtful word; Vigfusson suggests that it properly means a “mock sun.” <dfn>Wheel</dfn>: the manuscript adds the adjective “whirling,” to the destruction of the metre; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, 84, 3. <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-394" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-395" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Deceiver of Dvalin</dfn>: Dvalin was one of the foremost dwarfs; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 14, <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>, 13, and <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, 144. The sun “deceives” him because, like the other dwarfs living underground, he cannot live in its light, and always fears lest sunrise may catch him unaware. The sun’s rays have power to turn the dwarfs into stone, and the giantess Hrimgerth meets a similar fate (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar</i>, 30). Alvis suffers in the same way; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 35. <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-395" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-396" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri quotes this stanza in the <i xml:lang="non">Skaldskaparmal</i>. <dfn>Waverer</dfn>: the word is uncertain, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prose Edda</i> manuscripts giving it in various forms. <dfn>Blustering Blast</dfn>: two <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prose Edda</i> manuscripts give a totally different word, meaning “The Pounder.” <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-396" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-397" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hush</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: the manuscript, by inserting an additional letter, makes the word practically identical with that translated “Kite” in stanza 18. Most editors have agreed as to the emendation. <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-397" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-398" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Drink-Stuff</dfn>: Gering translates the word thus; I doubt it, but can suggest nothing better. <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-398" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-399" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Wildfire</dfn>: the word may mean any one of various things, including “Wave,” which is not unlikely. <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-399" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-400" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>In hell</dfn>: the word simply means “men,” and it is only a guess, though a generally accepted one, that here it refers to the dead. <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-400" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-401" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Nor</dfn>: presumably the giant whom Snorri calls Norvi or Narfi, father of Not (Night) and grandfather of Dag (Day). <abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 25. <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-401" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-402" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri quotes this stanza in the <i xml:lang="non">Skaldskaparmal</i>. The various <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prose Edda</i> manuscripts differ considerably in naming the gods, the giants, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <dfn>Lightless</dfn>: some manuscripts have “The Unsorrowing.” <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-402" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-403" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Grain</dfn>: the two words translated “grain” and “corn” apparently both meant primarily barley, and thence grain in general, the first being the commoner term of the two. <dfn>Drink-Stuff</dfn>: the word is identical with the one used, and commented on, in stanza 24, and again I have followed Gering’s interpretation for want of a better one. If his guess is correct, the reference here is evidently to grain as the material from which beer and other drinks are brewed. <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-403" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-404" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Suttung’s sons</dfn>: these ought to be the giants, but the giants are specifically mentioned in line 3. The phrase “Suttung’s sons” occurs in <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, 34, clearly meaning the giants. Concerning Suttung as the possessor of the mead of poetry, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, 104. <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-404" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-405" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Concerning the inability of the dwarfs to endure sunlight, which turns them into stone, <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 16 and note. Line 5 may be spurious. <a href="alvissmol.xhtml#noteref-405" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Baldrs Draumar -->
				<li id="note-406" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 1⁠–⁠3 are identical with <i xml:lang="non">Thrymskvitha</i>, 13, 1⁠–⁠3. <dfn>Baldr</dfn>: concerning this best and noblest of the gods, the son of Othin and Frigg, who comes again among the survivors after the final battle, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 32 and 62, and notes. He is almost never mentioned anywhere except in connection with the story of his death, though Snorri has one short passage praising his virtue and beauty. After stanza 1 two old editions, and one later one, insert four stanzas from late paper manuscripts. <a href="baldrs-draumar.xhtml#noteref-406" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-407" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sleipnir</dfn>: Othin’s eight-legged horse, the son of Loki and the stallion Svathilfari; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, 23, and <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 44, and notes. <dfn>Niflhel</dfn>: the murky (“nifl”) dwelling of Hel, goddess of the dead. <dfn>The hound</dfn>: Garm; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 44. <a href="baldrs-draumar.xhtml#noteref-407" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-408" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Father of magic</dfn>: Othin appears constantly as the god of magic. <dfn>Hel</dfn>: offspring of Loki and the giantess Angrbotha, as were the wolf Fenrir and Mithgarthsorm. She ruled the world of the unhappy dead, either those who had led evil lives or, according to another tradition, those who had not died in battle. The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, and thus the editions vary in their grouping of the lines of this and the succeeding stanzas. <a href="baldrs-draumar.xhtml#noteref-408" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-409" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript has no superscriptions indicating the speakers. <dfn>Vegtam</dfn> (“The Wanderer”): Othin, as usual, conceals his identity, calling himself the son of Valtam (“The Fighter”). In this instance he has unusual need to do so, for as the wise-woman belongs apparently to the race of the giants, she would be unwilling to answer a god’s questions. <dfn>Heaven</dfn>: the word used includes all the upper worlds, in contrast to hell. <dfn>Benches</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: the adornment of the benches and raised platforms, or elevated parts of the house, was a regular part of the preparation for a feast of welcome. The text of the two last lines is somewhat uncertain. <a href="baldrs-draumar.xhtml#noteref-409" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-410" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Grundtvig, followed by Edzardi, thinks a line has been lost between lines 3 and 4. <a href="baldrs-draumar.xhtml#noteref-410" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-411" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Concerning the blind Hoth, who, at Loki’s instigation, cast the fatal mistletoe at Baldr, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 32⁠–⁠33 and notes. In the manuscript the last line is abbreviated, as also in stanza 11. <a href="baldrs-draumar.xhtml#noteref-411" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-412" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript lines 1⁠–⁠2 are abbreviated, as also in stanza 12. <a href="baldrs-draumar.xhtml#noteref-412" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-413" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Rind</dfn>: mentioned by Snorri as one of the goddesses. Concerning her son Vali, begotten by Othin for the express purpose of avenging Baldr’s death, and his slaying of Hoth the day after his birth, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 33⁠–⁠34, where the lines of this stanza appear practically verbatim. <dfn>Vestrsalir</dfn> (“The Western Hall”): not elsewhere mentioned in the poems. <a href="baldrs-draumar.xhtml#noteref-413" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-414" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks the third line as the beginning of a stanza; something may have been lost. Lines 3⁠–⁠4 are thoroughly obscure. According to Bugge the maidens who are to weep for Baldr are the daughters of the sea-god Ægir, the waves, whose grief will be so tempestuous that they will toss the ships up to the very sky. “Yards of the sails” is a doubtfully accurate rendering; the two words, at any rate in later Norse nautical speech, meant respectively the “tack” and the “sheet” of the square sail. <a href="baldrs-draumar.xhtml#noteref-414" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-415" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Possibly two separate stanzas. <dfn>Enchanter</dfn>: the meaning of the original word is most uncertain. <a href="baldrs-draumar.xhtml#noteref-415" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-416" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Concerning Loki’s escape and his relation to the destruction of the gods, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 35 and 51, and notes. While the wise-woman probably means only that she will never speak again till the end of the world, it has been suggested, and is certainly possible, that she intends to give Loki her counsel, thus revenging herself on Othin. <a href="baldrs-draumar.xhtml#noteref-416" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Rigsthula -->
				<li id="note-417" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It would be interesting to know how much the annotator meant by the phrase <dfn>old stories</dfn>. Was he familiar with the tradition in forms other than that of the poem? If so, his introductory note was scanty, for, outside of identifying <dfn>Rig</dfn> as <dfn>Heimdall</dfn>, he provides no information not found in the poem. Probably he meant simply to refer to the poem itself as a relic of antiquity, and the identification of Rig as Heimdall may well have been an attempt at constructive criticism of his own. The note was presumably written somewhere about 1300, or even later, and there is no reason for crediting the annotator with any considerable knowledge of mythology. There is little to favor the identification of Rig with Heimdall, the watchman of the gods, beyond a few rather vague passages in the other poems. Thus in <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 1, the Volva asks hearing “from Heimdall’s sons both high and low”; in <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 13, there is a very doubtful line which may mean that Heimdall “o’er men holds sway, it is said,” and in “the Short Voluspo” (<i xml:lang="non">Hyndluljoth</i>, 40) he is called “the kinsman of men.” On the other hand, everything in the <i xml:lang="non">Rigsthula</i>, including the phrase “the aged and wise” in stanza 1, and the references to runes in stanzas 36, 44, and 46, fits Othin exceedingly well. It seems probable that the annotator was wrong, and that Rig is Othin, and not Heimdall. <dfn>Rig</dfn>: almost certainly based on the Old Irish word for “king,” “ri” or “rig.” <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-417" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-418" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap is indicated, but editors have generally assumed one. Some editors, however, add line 1 of stanza 2 to stanza 1. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-418" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-419" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Most editions make line 5 a part of the stanza, as here, but some indicate it as the sole remnant of one or more stanzas descriptive of Ai and Edda, just as Afi and Amma, Fathir and Mothir, are later described. <dfn>Ai and Edda</dfn>: Great-Grandfather and Great-Grandmother; the latter name was responsible for Jakob Grimm’s famous guess at the meaning of the word “Edda” as applied to the whole collection (<abbr>cf.</abbr> Introduction). <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-419" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-420" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A line may have been lost from this stanza. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-420" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-421" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 5 has generally been rejected as spurious. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-421" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-422" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript has lines 1⁠–⁠2 in inverse order, but marks the word “Rig” as the beginning of a stanza. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-422" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-423" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate that these lines form a separate stanza, and as only one line and a fragment of another are left of stanza 7, the editions have grouped the lines in all sorts of ways, with, of course, various conjectures as to where lines may have been lost. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-423" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-424" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>After line 1 the manuscript has only four words: “cloth,” “black,” “named,” and “Thræll.” No gap is anywhere indicated. Editors have pieced out the passage in various ways. <dfn>Water</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: concerning the custom of sprinkling water on children, which long antedated the introduction of Christianity, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, 159 and note. <dfn>Black</dfn>: dark hair, among the blond Scandinavians, was the mark of a foreigner, hence of a slave. <dfn>Thræll</dfn>: Thrall or Slave. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-424" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-425" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript line 1 of stanza 9 stands before stanza 8, neither line being capitalized as the beginning of a stanza. I have followed Bugge’s rearrangement. The manuscript indicates no gap in line 2, but nearly all editors have assumed one, Grundtvig supplying “and rough his nails.” <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-425" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-426" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 2 as the beginning of a stanza. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-426" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-427" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A line may well have dropped out, but the manuscript is too uncertain as to the stanza-divisions to make any guess safe. <dfn>Crooked</dfn>: the word in the original is obscure. <dfn>Stained</dfn>: literally, “water was on her soles.” <dfn>Thir</dfn>: “Serving-Woman.” <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-427" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-428" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is some confusion as to the arrangement of the lines and division into stanzas of 12 and 13. The names mean: <dfn>Fjosnir</dfn>, “Cattleman”; <dfn>Klur</dfn>, “The Coarse”; <dfn>Hreim</dfn>, “The Shouter”; <dfn>Kleggi</dfn>, “The Horsefly”; <dfn>Kefsir</dfn>, “Concubine-Keeper”; <dfn>Fulnir</dfn>, “The Stinking”; <dfn>Drumb</dfn>, “The Log”; <dfn>Digraldi</dfn>, “The Fat”; <dfn>Drott</dfn>, “The Sluggard”; <dfn>Leggjaldi</dfn>, “The Big-Legged”; <dfn>Lut</dfn>, “The Bent”; <dfn>Hosvir</dfn>, “The Grey.” <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-428" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-429" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The names mean: <dfn>Drumba</dfn>, “The Log”; <dfn>Kumba</dfn>, “The Stumpy”; <dfn>Ökkvinkalfa</dfn>, “Fat-Legged”; <dfn>Arinnefja</dfn>, “Homely-Nosed”; <dfn>Ysja</dfn>, “The Noisy”; <dfn>Ambott</dfn>, “The Servant”; <dfn>Eikintjasna</dfn>, “The Oaken Peg” (?); <dfn>Totrughypja</dfn>, “Clothed in Rags”; <dfn>Tronubeina</dfn>, “Crane-Legged.” <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-429" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-430" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript line 4 stands after line 4 of stanza 16, but several editors have rearranged the lines, as here. <dfn>Afi and Amma</dfn>: Grandfather and Grandmother. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-430" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-431" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is considerable confusion among the editors as to where this stanza begins and ends. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-431" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-432" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-432" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-433" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript jumps from stanza 17, line 1, to stanza 19, line 2. Bugge points out that the copyist’s eye was presumably led astray by the fact that 17, 1, and 19, 1, were identical. Lines 2⁠–⁠3 of 17 are supplied from stanzas 3 and 29. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-433" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-434" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I have followed Bugge’s conjectural construction of the missing stanza, taking lines 2 and 3 from stanzas 31 and 4. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-434" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-435" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 2 as the beginning of a stanza. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-435" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-436" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript omits line 2, supplied by analogy with stanza 6. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-436" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-437" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Most editors assume a lacuna, after either line 2 or line 3. Sijmons assumes, on the analogy of stanza 8, that a complete stanza describing <dfn>Karl</dfn> (“Yeoman”) has been lost between stanzas 21 and 22. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-437" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-438" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No line indicated in the manuscript as beginning a stanza. <dfn>Cart</dfn>: the word in the original, “kartr,” is one of the clear signs of the Celtic influence noted in the introduction. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-438" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-439" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Bring</dfn>: the word literally means “drove in a wagon”⁠—a mark of the bride’s social status. <dfn>Snör</dfn>: “Daughter-in-Law.” Bugge, followed by several editors, maintains that line 4 was wrongly interpolated here from a missing stanza describing the marriage of Kon. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-439" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-440" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No line indicated in the manuscript as beginning a stanza. The names mean: <dfn>Hal</dfn>, “Man”; <dfn>Dreng</dfn>, “The Strong”; <dfn>Holth</dfn>, “The Holder of Land”; <dfn>Thegn</dfn>, “Freeman”; <dfn>Smith</dfn>, “Craftsman”; <dfn>Breith</dfn>, “The Broad-Shouldered”; <dfn>Bondi</dfn>, “Yeoman”; <dfn>Bundinskeggi</dfn>, “With Beard Bound” (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, not allowed to hang unkempt); <dfn>Bui</dfn>, “Dwelling-Owner”; <dfn>Boddi</dfn>, “Farm-Holder”; <dfn>Brattskegg</dfn>, “With Beard Carried High”; <dfn>Segg</dfn>, “Man.” <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-440" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-441" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No line indicated in the manuscript as beginning a stanza. The names mean: <dfn>Snot</dfn>, “Worthy Woman”; <dfn>Bruth</dfn>, “Bride”; <dfn>Svanni</dfn>, “The Slender”; <dfn>Svarri</dfn>, “The Proud”; <dfn>Sprakki</dfn>, “The Fair”; <dfn>Fljoth</dfn>, “Woman” (?); <dfn>Sprund</dfn>, “The Proud”; <dfn>Vif</dfn>, “Wife”; <dfn>Feima</dfn>, “The Bashful”; <dfn>Ristil</dfn>, “The Graceful.” <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-441" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-442" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many editors make a stanza out of line 4 and lines 1⁠–⁠2 of the following stanza. <dfn>Strewn</dfn>: with fresh straw in preparation for a feast; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Thrymskvitha</i>, 22. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-442" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-443" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Fathir and Mothir</dfn>: Father and Mother. Perhaps lines 3⁠–⁠4 should form a stanza with 28, 1⁠–⁠2. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-443" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-444" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bugge thinks lines 5⁠–⁠6, like 23, 4, got in here from the lost stanzas describing Kon’s bride and his marriage. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-444" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-445" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript of lines 1⁠–⁠3 is obviously defective, as there are too many words for two lines, and not enough for the full three. The meaning, however, is clearly very much as indicated in the translation. Gering’s emendation, which I have followed, consists simply in shifting “set before them” from the first line to the second⁠—where the manuscript has no verb⁠—and supplying the verb “brought” in line 1. The various editions contain all sorts of suggestions. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-445" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-446" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript begins both line 1 and line 2 with a capital preceded by a period, which has led to all sorts of strange stanza-combinations and guesses at lost lines in the various editions. The confusion includes stanza 33, wherein no line is marked in the manuscript as beginning a stanza. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-446" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-447" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Jarl</dfn>: “Nobly-Born.” <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-447" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-448" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Various lines have been regarded as interpolations, 3 and 6 being most often thus rejected. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-448" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-449" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 1, 2, and 5 all begin with capitals preceded by periods, a fact which, taken in conjunction with the obviously defective state of the following stanza, has led to all sorts of conjectural emendations. The exact significance of Rig’s giving his own name to Jarl (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 46), and thus recognizing him, potentially at least, as a king, depends on the conditions under which the poem was composed (<abbr>cf.</abbr> Introductory Note). The whole stanza, particularly the reference to the teaching of magic (runes), fits Othin far better than Heimdall. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-449" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-450" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Something⁠—one or two lines, or a longer passage⁠—has clearly been lost, describing the beginning of Jarl’s journey. Yet many editors, relying on the manuscript punctuation, make 37 and 38 into a single stanza. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-450" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-451" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks both lines 1 and 2 as beginning stanzas. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-451" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-452" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hersir</dfn>: “Lord”; the hersir was, in the early days before the establishment of a kingdom in Norway, the local chief, and hence the highest recognized authority. During and after the time of Harald the Fair-Haired the name lost something of its distinction, the hersir coming to take rank below the jarl. <dfn>Erna</dfn>: “The Capable.” <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-452" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-453" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The names mean: <dfn>Bur</dfn>, “Son”; <dfn>Barn</dfn>, “Child”; <dfn>Joth</dfn>, “Child”; <dfn>Athal</dfn>, “Offspring”; <dfn>Arfi</dfn>, “Heir”; <dfn>Mog</dfn>, “Son”; <dfn>Nith</dfn>, “Descendant”; <dfn>Svein</dfn>, “Boy”; <dfn>Sun</dfn>, “Son”; <dfn>Nithjung</dfn>, “Descendant”; <dfn>Kund</dfn>, “Kinsman”; <dfn>Kon</dfn>, “Son” (of noble birth). Concerning the use made of this last name, see note on stanza 44. It is curious that there is no list of the daughters of Jarl and Erna, and accordingly Vigfusson inserts here the names listed in stanza 25. Grundtvig rearranges the lines of stanzas 42 and 43. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-453" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-454" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates no line as beginning a stanza. <dfn>Kon the Young</dfn>: a remarkable bit of fanciful etymology; the phrase is “Konr ungr,” which could readily be contracted into “Konungr,” the regular word meaning “king.” The “kon” part is actually not far out, but the second syllable of “konungr” has nothing to do with “ungr” meaning “young.” <dfn>Runes</dfn>: a long list of just such magic charms, dulling swordblades, quenching flames, and so on, is given in <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, 147⁠–⁠163. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-454" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-455" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates no line as beginning a stanza. <dfn>Minds</dfn>: possibly “seas,” the word being doubtful. Most editors assume the gap as indicated. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-455" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-456" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates no line as beginning a stanza. <dfn>Rig-Jarl</dfn>: Kon’s father; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 36. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-456" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-457" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza has often been combined with 48, either as a whole or in part. <dfn>Crow</dfn>: birds frequently play the part of mentor in Norse literature; <abbr>cf.</abbr>, for example, <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, 5, and <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>, 32. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-457" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-458" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This fragment is not indicated as a separate stanza in the manuscript. Perhaps half a line has disappeared, or, as seems more likely, the gap includes two lines and a half. Sijmons actually constructs these lines, largely on the basis of stanzas 35 and 38. Bugge fills in the half-line lacuna as indicated above with “The sword to wield.” <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-458" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-459" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Dan and Danp</dfn>: These names are largely responsible for the theory that the <i xml:lang="non">Rigsthula</i> was composed in Denmark. According to the Latin epitome of the <i xml:lang="non">Skjöldungasaga</i> by Arngrimur Jonsson, “Rig (Rigus) was a man not the least among the great ones of his time. He married the daughter of a certain Danp, lord of Danpsted, whose name was Dana; and later, having won the royal title for his province, left as his heir his son by Dana, called Dan or Danum, all of whose subjects were called Danes.” This may or may not be conclusive, and it is a great pity that the manuscript breaks off abruptly at this stanza. <a href="rigsthula.xhtml#noteref-459" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Hyndluljoth -->
				<li id="note-460" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Freyja</dfn>: The names of the speakers do not appear in the manuscripts. On Freyja <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 21 and note; <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, introductory prose and note; <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, introductory prose and note. As stanzas 9⁠–⁠10 show, Ottar has made a wager of his entire inheritance with Angantyr regarding the relative loftiness of their ancestry, and by rich offerings (Hyndla hints at less commendable methods) has induced Freyja to assist him in establishing his genealogy. Freyja, having turned Ottar for purposes of disguise into a boar, calls on the giantess <dfn>Hyndla</dfn> (“She-Dog”) to aid her. Hyndla does not appear elsewhere in the poems. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-460" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-461" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Heerfather</dfn>: Othin; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 30. <dfn>Hermoth</dfn>: mentioned in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prose Edda</i> as a son of Othin who is sent to Hel to ask for the return of the slain Baldr. <dfn>Sigmund</dfn>: according to the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> Sigmund was the son of Volsung, and hence Othin’s great-great-grandson (note that Wagner eliminates all the intervening generations by the simple expedient of using Volsung’s name as one of Othin’s many appellations). Sigmund alone was able to draw from the tree the sword which a mysterious stranger (Othin, of course) had thrust into it (compare the first act of Wagner’s <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera" xml:lang="de">Die Walküre</i>). <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-461" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-462" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sijmons suggests that this stanza may be an interpolation. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-462" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-463" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No lacuna after line 2 is indicated in the manuscript. Editors have attempted various experiments in rearranging this and the following stanza. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-463" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-464" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors, following Simrock, assign this whole stanza to Hyndla; others assign to her lines 3⁠–⁠4. Giving the entire stanza to Freyja makes better sense than any other arrangement, but is dependent on changing the manuscript’s “thy” in line 3 to “my,” as suggested by Bugge. The boar on which Freyja rides (“my worthy steed”) is, of course, Ottar. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-464" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-465" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hyndla detects Ottar, and accuses Freyja of having her lover with her. Unless Ottar is identical with Oth (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 25 and note), which seems most unlikely, there is no other reference to this love affair. <dfn>The way of the slain</dfn>: the road to Valhall. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-465" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-466" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Various experiments have been made in condensing the stanza into four lines, or in combining it with stanza 8. <dfn>Hildisvini</dfn> (“Battle-Swine”): perhaps Freyja refers to the boar with golden bristles given, according to Snorri, to her brother Freyr by the dwarfs. <dfn>Dain</dfn>: a dwarf; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 11. <dfn>Nabbi</dfn>: a dwarf nowhere else mentioned. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-466" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-467" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first line is obviously corrupt in the manuscript, and has been variously emended. The general assumption is that in the interval between stanzas 7 and 8 Freyja and Hyndla have arrived at Valhall. No lacuna is indicated in the manuscript. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-467" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-468" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Foreign metal</dfn>: gold. The word <i xml:lang="non">valr</i>, meaning “foreign,” and akin to “Welsh,” is interesting in this connection, and some editors interpret it frankly as “Celtic,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Irish. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-468" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-469" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>To glass</dfn>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, the constant fires on the altar have fused the stone into glass. Glass beads, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, were of very early use, though the use of glass for windows probably did not begin in Iceland much before 1200. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-469" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-470" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Possibly two stanzas, or perhaps one with interpolations. The manuscript omits the first half of line 4, here filled out from stanza 16, line 2. <dfn>Skjoldungs</dfn>: the descendants of Skjold, a mythical king who was Othin’s son and the ancestor of the Danish kings; <abbr>cf.</abbr> Snorri’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Skaldskaparmal</i>, 43. <dfn>Skilfings</dfn>: mentioned by Snorri as descendants of King Skelfir, a mythical ruler in “the East.” In <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 54, the name Skilfing appears as one of Othin’s many appellations. <dfn>Othlings</dfn>: Snorri derives this race from Authi, the son of Halfdan the Old (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 14). <dfn>Ylfings</dfn>: some editors have changed this to “Ynglings,” as in stanza 16, referring to the descendants of Yng or Yngvi, another son of Halfdan, but the reference may be to the same mythical family to which Helgi Hundingsbane belonged (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, 5). <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-470" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-471" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Instein</dfn>: mentioned in the <i xml:lang="non">Halfssaga</i> as one of the warriors of King Half of Horthaland (the so-called Halfsrekkar). The others mentioned in this stanza appear in one of the later mythical accounts of the settlement of Norway. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-471" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-472" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanzas 14⁠–⁠16 are clearly interpolated, as Friaut (stanza 13, line 3) is the daughter of Hildigun (stanza 17, line 1). <dfn>Halfdan</dfn> the Old, a mythical king of Denmark, called by Snorri “the most famous of all kings,” of whom it was foretold that “for three hundred years there should be no woman and no man in his line who was not of great repute.” After the slaying of Sigtrygg he married Almveig (or Alvig), daughter of King Eymund of Holmgarth (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Russia), who bore him eighteen sons, nine at one birth. These nine were all slain, but the other nine were traditionally the ancestors of the most famous families in Northern hero lore. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-472" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-473" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Compare stanza 11. All or part of this stanza may be interpolated. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-473" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-474" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hildigun</dfn> (or Hildiguth): with this the poem returns to Ottar’s direct ancestry, Hildigun being Friaut’s mother. <dfn>Line 4</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> the refrain-line in the <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i> (stanzas 27, 29, <abbr>etc.</abbr>). <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-474" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-475" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Another interpolation, as Ketil (stanza 19, line 1) is the husband of Hildigun (stanza 17). <dfn>Dag</dfn>: one of Halfdan’s sons, and ancestor of the Döglings. Line 5 may be a late addition. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-475" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-476" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Ketil</dfn>: the semi-mythical Ketil Hortha-Kari, from whom various Icelandic families traced their descent. <dfn>Hoalf</dfn>: probably King Half of Horthaland, hero of the <i xml:lang="non">Halfssaga</i>, and son of Hjorleif and Hild (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 12, note). <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-476" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-477" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Nanna</dfn>: the manuscript has “Manna.” Of Nanna and her father, Nokkvi, we know nothing, but apparently Nanna’s son married a sister of Instein, Ottar’s father. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-477" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-478" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Olmoth</dfn>: one of the sons of Ketil Hortha-Kari. <dfn>Line 4</dfn>: here, and generally hereafter when it appears in the poem, this refrain-line is abbreviated in the manuscript to the word “all.” <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-478" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-479" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An isolated stanza, which some editors place after stanza 24, others combining lines 1⁠–⁠2 with the fragmentary stanza 23. In the manuscript lines 3⁠–⁠4 stand after stanza 24, where they fail to connect clearly with anything. <dfn>Hrolf the Old</dfn>: probably King Hrolf Gautreksson of Gautland, in the saga relating to whom (<i xml:lang="non">Fornaldar sögur</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, 57 <abbr>ff.</abbr>) appear the names of Thorir the Iron-shield and Grim Thorkelsson. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-479" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-480" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanzas 23 and 24 name the twelve Berserkers, the sons of Arngrim and Eyfura, the story of whom is told in the <i xml:lang="non">Hervararsaga</i> and the <i xml:lang="non">Orvar-Oddssaga</i>. Saxo Grammaticus tells of the battle between them and Hjalmar and Orvar-Odd. Line 1 does not appear in the manuscript, but is added from the list of names given in the sagas. The Berserkers were wild warriors, distinguished above all by the fits of frenzy to which they were subject in battle; during these fits they howled like wild beasts, foamed at the mouth, and gnawed the iron rims of their shields. At such times they were proof against steel or fire, but when the fever abated they were weak. The etymology of the word <dfn>berserk</dfn> is disputed; probably, however, it means “bear-shirt.” <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-480" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-481" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript omits the first half of line 1, here supplied from the <i xml:lang="non">Orvar-Oddssaga</i>. <dfn>Bolm</dfn>: probably the island of Bolmsö, in the Swedish province of Småland. In the manuscript and in most editions stanza 24 is followed by lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 22. Some editors reject line 5 as spurious. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-481" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-482" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript line 1 stands after line 4 of stanza 29. Probably a stanza enumerating Jormunrek’s sons has been lost. Many editors combine lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 22 and lines 2⁠–⁠4 of stanza 25 into one stanza. <dfn>Jormunrek</dfn>: the historical Ermanarich, king of the Goths, who died about 376. According to Norse tradition, in which Jormunrek played a large part, he slew his own sons (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarhvot</i> and <i xml:lang="non">Hamthesmol</i>). In the saga Jormunrek married Sigurth’s daughter, Svanhild. Stanzas 25⁠–⁠27 connect Ottar’s descent with the whole Volsung-Sigurth-Jormunrek-Gjuki genealogy. The story of <dfn>Sigurth</dfn> is the basis for most of the heroic poems of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edda</i>, of the famous <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>, and, in Germany, of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="de">Nibelungenlied</i>. On his battle with the dragon <dfn>Fafnir</dfn> <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-482" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-483" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Volsung</dfn>: Sigurth’s grandfather and Othin’s great-grandson. <dfn>Hjordis</dfn>: daughter of King Eylimi, wife of Sigmund and mother of Sigurth. <dfn>Othlings</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 11. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-483" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-484" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gunnar</dfn>, <dfn>Hogni</dfn>, and <dfn>Guthrun</dfn>: the three children of the Burgundian king <dfn>Gjuki</dfn> and his wife Grimhild (Kriemhild); Guthrun was Sigurth’s wife. <dfn>Gotthorm</dfn>, the third brother, who killed Sigurth at Brynhild’s behest, was Grimhild’s son, and thus a stepson of Gjuki. These four play an important part in the heroic cycle of Eddic poems. <abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, introductory note. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-484" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-485" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript and in many editions these two lines stand between stanzas 33 and 34. The change here made follows Bugge. The manuscript indicates no gap between stanzas 27 and 29. <dfn>Hvethna</dfn>: wife of King Halfdan of Denmark. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-485" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-486" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript and many editions include line 1 of stanza 25 after line 4 of stanza 29. The story of <dfn>Harald Battle-tooth</dfn> is told in detail by Saxo Grammaticus. Harald’s father was <dfn>Hrörek</dfn>, king of Denmark; his mother was <dfn>Auth</dfn>, daughter of <dfn>Ivar</dfn>, king of Sweden. After Ivar had treacherously destroyed Hrörek, Auth fled with Harald to Russia, where she married King <dfn>Rathbarth</dfn>. Harald’s warlike career in Norway, and his death on the Bravalla-field at the hands of his nephew, Sigurth Ring, son of <dfn>Randver</dfn> and grandson of Rathbarth and Auth, were favorite saga themes. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-486" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-487" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>At this point begins the fragmentary and interpolated “short <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>” identified by Snorri. The manuscript gives no indication of the break in the poem’s continuity. <dfn>Eleven</dfn>: there are various references to the “twelve” gods (including Baldr); Snorri (<i xml:lang="non">Gylfaginning</i>, 20⁠–⁠33) lists the following twelve in addition to Othin: Thor, Baldr, Njorth, Freyr, Tyr, Bragi, Heimdall, Hoth, Vithar, Vali, Ull and Forseti; he adds Loki as of doubtful divinity. <dfn>Baldr</dfn> and <dfn>Vali</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 32⁠–⁠33. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-487" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-488" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fragmentary stanzas 31⁠–⁠34 have been regrouped in various ways, and with many conjectures as to omissions, none of which are indicated in the manuscript. The order here is as in the manuscript, except that lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 28 have been transposed from after line 2 of stanza 33. <dfn>Bur’s heir</dfn>: Othin; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 4. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-488" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-489" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Freyr, Gerth, Gymir</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>. <dfn>Aurbotha</dfn>: a giantess, mother of Gerth. <dfn>Thjazi</dfn> and <dfn>Skathi</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, 49, and <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 19. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-489" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-490" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 44 and 27. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-490" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-491" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Heith</dfn> (“Witch”) and <dfn>Hrossthjof</dfn> (“Horse-thief”): the only other reference to the giant <dfn>Hrimnir</dfn> (<i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, 28) makes no mention of his children. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-491" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-492" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza is quoted by Snorri (<i xml:lang="non">Gylfaginning</i>, 5). Of <dfn>Vitholf</dfn> (“Forest Wolf”), <dfn>Vilmeith</dfn> (“Wish-Tree”) and <dfn>Svarthofthi</dfn> (“Black Head”) nothing further is known. <dfn>Ymir</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 3. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-492" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-493" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to Snorri (<i xml:lang="non">Gylfaginning</i>, 27) Heimdall was the son of Othin and of nine sisters. As Heimdall was the watchman of the gods, this has given rise to much “solar myth” discussion. The names of his nine giantess mothers are frequently said to denote attributes of the sea. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-493" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-494" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The names of Heimdall’s mothers may be rendered “Yelper,” “Griper,” “Foamer,” “Sand-Strewer,” “She-Wolf,” “Sorrow-Whelmer,” “Dusk,” “Fury,” and “Iron-Sword.” <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-494" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-495" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It has been suggested that these lines were interpolated from <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 22. Some editors add the refrain of stanza 36. <dfn>Swine’s blood</dfn>: to Heimdall’s strength drawn from earth and sea was added that derived from sacrifice. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-495" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-496" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript this stanza stands after stanza 44. Regarding Heimdall’s kinship to the three great classes of men, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Rigsthula</i>, introductory note, wherein the apparent confusion of his attributes with those of Othin is discussed. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-496" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-497" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Probably a lacuna before this stanza. Regarding the <dfn>wolf</dfn> Fenrir, born of <dfn>Loki</dfn> and the giantess <dfn>Angrbotha</dfn>, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 39 and note. <dfn>Sleipnir</dfn>: Othin’s eight-legged horse, born of the stallion <dfn>Svathilfari</dfn> and of Loki in the guise of a mare (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 44). <dfn>The worst</dfn>: doubtless referring to Mithgarthsorm, another child of Loki. <dfn>The brother of Byleist</dfn>: Loki; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 51. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-497" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-498" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nothing further is known of the myth here referred to, wherein Loki (Lopt) eats the cooked heart of a woman and thus himself gives birth to a monster. The reference is not likely to be to the serpent, as, according to Snorri (<i xml:lang="non">Gylfaginning</i>, 34), the wolf, the serpent, and Hel were all the children of Loki and Angrbotha. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-498" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-499" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Probably an omission, perhaps of considerable length, before this stanza. For the description of the destruction of the world, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 57. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-499" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-500" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 65, where the possible reference to Christianity is noted. With this stanza the fragmentary “short <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>” ends, and the dialogue between Freyja and Hyndla continues. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-500" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-501" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Freyja now admits the identity of her boar as Ottar, who with the help of the “memory-beer” is to recall the entire genealogy he has just heard, and thus win his wager with Angantyr. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-501" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-502" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Heithrun</dfn>: the she-goat that stands by Valhall (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 25), the name being here used simply of she-goats in general, in caustic comment on Freyja’s morals. Of these Loki entertained a similar view; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, 30. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-502" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-503" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Oth</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 6 and note, and <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 25 and note. Lines 3⁠–⁠4, abbreviated in the manuscript, are very likely repeated here by mistake. <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-503" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-504" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript repeats once again lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 47 as the last two lines of this stanza. It seems probable that two lines have been lost, to the effect that Freyja will burn the giantess alive</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“If swiftly now</span>
								<span>thou dost not seek,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>And hither bring</span>
								<span>the memory-beer.” <a href="hyndluljoth.xhtml#noteref-504" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<!-- Svipdagsmol -->
				<li id="note-505" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Svipdag</dfn> (“Swift Day”): the names of the speakers are lacking in the manuscripts. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-505" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-506" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The woman</dfn>: Svipdag’s stepmother, who is responsible for his search for <dfn>Mengloth</dfn> (“Necklace-Glad”). This name has suggested that Mengloth is really Frigg, possessor of the famous Brisings’ necklace, or else Freyja (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, 20, note). <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-506" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-507" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For this catalogue of charms (stanzas 6⁠–⁠14) <abbr>cf.</abbr> the <i xml:lang="non">Ljothatal</i> (<i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, 147⁠–⁠165). <dfn>Rani</dfn> and <dfn>Rind</dfn>: the manuscripts have these words in inverse relation; I have followed Neckel’s emendation. Rind was the giantess who became the mother of Vali, Othin’s son, the one-night-old avenger of Baldr (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 33⁠–⁠34, and <i xml:lang="non">Baldrs Draumar</i>, 11 and note). Rani is presumably Othin, who, according to a skaldic poem, won Rind by magic. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-507" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-508" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Urth</dfn>: one of the three Norns, or Fates; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 20. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-508" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-509" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Horn</dfn> and <dfn>Ruth</dfn>: these two rivers, here used merely to symbolize all dangerous streams, are not included in the catalogue of rivers given in <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 27⁠–⁠29, for which reason some editors have changed the names to Hron and Hrith. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-509" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-510" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza is a close parallel to <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, 150, and the fifth line may well be an interpolation from line 4 of that stanza. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-510" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-511" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>A dead Christian woman</dfn>: this passage has distressed many editors, who have sought to emend the text so as to make it mean simply “a dead witch.” The fact seems to be, however, that this particular charm was composed at a time when Christians were regarded by all conservative pagans as emissaries of darkness. A dead woman’s curse would naturally be more potent, whether she was Christian or otherwise, than a living one’s. Presumably this charm is much older than the poem in which it here stands. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-511" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-512" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>At this point Groa’s song ends, and Svipdag, thus fortified, goes to seek Mengloth. All the link that is needed between the poems is approximately this: “Then Svipdag searched long for Mengloth, and at last he came to a great house set all about with flames. And before the house there was a giant.” <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-512" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-513" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Most editors have here begun a new series of stanza numbers, but if the <i xml:lang="non">Grougaldr</i> and the <i xml:lang="non">Fjolsvinnsmol</i> are to be considered as a single poem, it seems more reasonable to continue the stanza numbers consecutively. Bugge thinks a stanza has been lost before 17, including Fjolsvith’s name, so that the “he” in line 1 might have something to refer to. However, just such a prose link as I have suggested in the note on stanza 16 would serve the purpose. Editors have suggested various rearrangements in the lines of stanzas 17⁠–⁠19. The substance, however, is clear enough. The giant <dfn>Fjolsvith</dfn> (“Much-Wise”), the warder of the house in which Mengloth dwells, sees Svipdag coming and stops him with the customary threats. The assignment of the speeches in stanzas 17⁠–⁠20, in the absence of any indications in the manuscripts, is more or less guesswork. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-513" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-514" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Vindkald</dfn> (“Wind-Cold”), <dfn>Varkald</dfn> (“Cold of Early Spring”) and <dfn>Fjolkald</dfn> (“Much Cold”): Svipdag apparently seeks to persuade Fjolsvith that he belongs to the frost giants. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-514" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-515" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Svafrthorin</dfn>: who he was, or what his name means, or who his son was, are all unknown. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-515" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-516" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Thrymgjol</dfn> (“Loud-Clanging”): this gate, like the gate of the dead, shuts so fast as to trap those who attempt to use it (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 68 and note). It was made by the dwarfs, sons of <dfn>Solblindi</dfn> (“Sun-Blinded”), the traditional craftsmen, who could not endure the light of day. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-516" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-517" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gastropnir</dfn>: “Guest-Crusher.” <dfn>Leirbrimir’s</dfn> (“Clay-Giant’s”) <dfn>limbs</dfn>: a poetic circumlocution for “clay”; <abbr>cf.</abbr> the description of the making of earth from the body of the giant Ymir, <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 21. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-517" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-518" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Mimameith</dfn> (“Mimir’s Tree”): the ash Yggdrasil, that overshadows the whole world. The well of Mimir was situated at its base; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 27⁠–⁠29. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-518" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-519" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gering suggests that two stanzas have been lost between stanzas 15 and 16, but the giant’s answer fits the question quite well enough. The fruit of Yggdrasil, when cooked, is here assumed to have the power of assuring safe childbirth. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-519" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-520" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Vithofnir</dfn> (“Tree-Snake”): apparently identical with either the cock Gollinkambi (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 43) or Fjalar (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 42), the former of which wakes the gods to battle, and the latter the giants. <dfn>Surt</dfn>: the giant mentioned in <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 52, as ruler of the fire-world; here used to represent the giants in general, who are constantly in terror of the cock’s eternal watchfulness. <dfn>Sinmora</dfn>: presumably Surt’s wife, the giantess who possesses the weapon by which alone the cock Vithofnir may be slain. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-520" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-521" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The last two lines have been variously emended. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-521" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-522" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gif</dfn> and <dfn>Geri</dfn>: both names signify “Greedy.” The first part of line 3 is conjectural; the manuscripts indicate the word “eleven,” which clearly fails to make sense. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-522" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-523" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Lævatein</dfn> (“Wounding Wand”): the manuscripts differ as to the form of this name. The suggestion that the reference is to the mistletoe with which Baldr was killed seems hardly reasonable. <dfn>Lopt</dfn>: Loki. <dfn>Lægjarn</dfn> (“Lover of Ill”): Loki; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 35, where the term appears as an adjective applied to Loki. This is Falk’s emendation for the manuscripts’ “Sægjarn,” meaning “Sea Lover.” <dfn>Sinmora</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 34. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-523" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-524" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Goddess of gold</dfn>: poetic circumlocution for “woman,” here meaning Sinmora. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-524" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-525" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sickle</dfn>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, tail feather. With this the circle of impossibilities is completed. To get past the dogs, they must be fed with the wing-joints of the cock Vithofnir; the cock can be killed only with the sword in Sinmora’s possession, and Sinmora will give up the sword only in return for the tail feather of the cock. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-525" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-526" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Lyr</dfn> (“Heat-Holding”): just what the spear-point reference means is not altogether clear. Presumably it refers to the way in which the glowing brightness of the lofty hall makes it seem to quiver and turn in the air, but the tradition, never baffled by physical laws, may have actually balanced the whole building on a single point to add to the difficulties of entrance. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-526" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-527" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Loki</dfn>, the one god named, was the builder of the hall, with the aid of the nine dwarfs. <dfn>Jari</dfn>, <dfn>Dori</dfn>, and <dfn>Ori</dfn> appear in the <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i> catalogue of the dwarfs (stanzas 13 and 15); <dfn>Delling</dfn> appears in <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, 161, and <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 25, in the latter case, however, the name quite possibly referring to some one else. The other dwarfs’ names do not appear elsewhere. The manuscripts differ as to the forms of many of these names. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-527" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-528" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Lyfjaberg</dfn> (“Hill of Healing”): the manuscripts vary as to this name; I have followed Bugge’s suggestion. This stanza implies that Mengloth is a goddess of healing, and hence, perhaps, an hypostasis of Frigg, as already intimated by her name (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 3, note). In stanza 54 Eir appears as one of Mengloth’s handmaidens, and Eir, according to Snorri (<i xml:lang="non">Gylfaginning</i>, 35) is herself the Norse Hygeia. Compare this stanza with stanza 32. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-528" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-529" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscripts and editions show many variations in these names. They may be approximately rendered thus: Helper, Help-Breather, Folk-Guardian, Shining, White, Blithe, Peaceful, Kindly (?), and Gold-Giver. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-529" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-530" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>One of the manuscripts omits stanzas 55 and 56. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-530" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-531" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first line is based on a conjectural emendation. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-531" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-532" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Solbjart</dfn> (“Sun-Bright”): not elsewhere mentioned. <dfn>The words of Urth</dfn>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, the decrees of fate; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 7. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-532" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-533" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Lyfjaberg</dfn> <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 52 and note. <a href="svipdagsmol.xhtml#noteref-533" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Volundarkvitha -->
				<li id="note-534" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Nithuth</dfn> (“Bitter Hater”): here identified as a king of Sweden, is in the poem (stanzas 9, 15 and 32) called lord of the Njars, which may refer to the people of the Swedish district of Nerike. In any case, the scene of the story has moved from Saxon lands into the Northeast. The first and last sentences of the introduction refer to the second part of the poem; the rest of it concerns the swan-maidens episode. <dfn>Bothvild</dfn> (“Warlike Maid”): Völund’s victim in the latter part of the poem. <dfn>King of the Finns</dfn>: this notion, clearly later than the poem, which calls Völund an elf, may perhaps be ascribed to the annotator who composed the prose introduction. The Finns, meaning the dwellers in Lapland, were generally credited with magic powers. <dfn>Egil</dfn> appears in the <i xml:lang="non">Thithrekssaga</i> as Völund’s brother, but <dfn>Slagfith</dfn> is not elsewhere mentioned. <dfn>Ulfdalir</dfn> (“Wolf-Dale”), <dfn>Ulfsjar</dfn> (“Wolf-Sea”), <dfn>Valland</dfn> (“Slaughter-Land”): mythical places without historical identification. <dfn>Valkyries</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 31 and note; there is nothing in the poem to identify the three swan-maidens as Valkyries except one obscure word in line 2 of stanza 1 and again in line 5 of stanza 5, which may mean, as Gering translates it, “helmed,” or else “fair and wise.” I suspect that the annotator, anxious to give the Saxon legend as much northern local color as possible, was mistaken in his mythology, and that the poet never conceived of his swan-maidens as Valkyries at all. However, this identification of swan-maidens with Valkyries was not uncommon; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helreith Brynhildar</i>, 7. The three maidens’ names, <dfn>Hlathguth</dfn>, <dfn>Hervor</dfn>, and <dfn>Olrun</dfn>, do not appear in the lists of Valkyries. <dfn>King Hlothver</dfn>: this name suggests the southern origin of the story, as it is the northern form of Ludwig; the name appears again in <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 26, and that of <dfn>Kjar</dfn> is found in <i xml:lang="non">Atlakvitha</i>, 7, both of these poems being based on German stories. It is worth noting that the composer of this introductory note seems to have had little or no information beyond what was actually contained in the poem as it has come down to us; he refers to the “old stories” about Völund, but either he was unfamiliar with them in detail or else he thought it needless to make use of them. His note simply puts in clear and connected form what the verse tells somewhat obscurely; his only additions are making Nithuth a king of Sweden and Völund’s father a king of the Finns, supplying the name Ulfsjar for the lake, identifying the swan-maidens as Valkyries, and giving Kjar a home in Valland. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-534" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-535" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza; two lines may have been lost before or after lines 1⁠–⁠2, and two more, or even six, with the additional stanza describing the theft of the swan-garments, after line 4. <dfn>Myrkwood</dfn>: a stock name for a magic, dark forest; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, 42. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-535" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-536" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript these two lines stand after stanza 16; editors have tried to fit them into various places, but the prose indicates that they belong here, with a gap assumed. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-536" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-537" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript these two lines follow stanza 1, with no gap indicated, and the first line marked as the beginning of a stanza. Many editors have combined them with stanza 4. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-537" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-538" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No lacuna indicated in the manuscript; one editor fills the stanza out with a second line running: “Then to her breast Slagfith embraced.” <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-538" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-539" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 3 looks like an interpolation, but line 5, identical with line 2 of stanza 1, may be the superfluous one. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-539" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-540" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The phrase “Völund home from a weary way” is an emendation of Bugge’s, accepted by many editors. Some of those who do not include it reject line 4, and combine the remainder of the stanza with all or part of stanza 7. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-540" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-541" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks the second, and not the first, line as the beginning of a stanza. Some editors combine lines 2⁠–⁠3 with all or part of stanza 8. No gap is indicated in the manuscript, but many editors have assumed one, some of them accepting Bugge’s suggested</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Till back the maiden</span>
								<span>bright should come.” <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-541" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-542" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No line in this stanza is indicated in the manuscript as beginning a new stanza; editors have tried all sorts of experiments in regrouping the lines into stanzas with those of stanzas 7 and 9. In line 3 the word <dfn>long</dfn> is sheer guesswork, as the line in the manuscript contains a metrical error. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-542" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-543" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors combine the first two lines with parts of stanza 8, and the last two with the first half of stanza 10. <dfn>Njars</dfn>: there has been much, and inconclusive, discussion as to what this name means; probably it applies to a semi-mythical people somewhere vaguely in “the East.” <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-543" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-544" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors combine lines 3⁠–⁠4 with the fragmentary stanza 11. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-544" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-545" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap indicated in the manuscript; some editors combine these lines with lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 10, while others combine them with the first two lines of stanza 12. The one ring which Nithuth’s men steal is given to Bothvild, and proves the cause of her undoing. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-545" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-546" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 3, and not line 1, as the beginning of a stanza, which has given rise to a large amount of conjectural rearrangement. Line 2 of the original is identical with the phrase added by Bugge in stanza 6. Line 5 may be spurious, or lines 4⁠–⁠5 may have been expanded out of a single line running</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“The wind-dried wood</span>
								<span>for Völund burned well.” <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-546" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-547" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Elves</dfn>: the poem here identifies Völund as belonging to the race of the elves. <dfn>Hlothver’s daughter</dfn>: Hervor; many editors treat the adjective “all-wise” here as a proper name. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-547" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-548" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In this poem the manuscript indicates the speakers. Some editors make lines 1⁠–⁠2 into a separate stanza, linking lines 3⁠–⁠5 (or 4⁠–⁠5) with stanza 16. Line 3 is very possibly spurious, a mere expansion of “Nithuth spake.” Nithuth, of course, has come with his men to capture Völund, and now charges him with having stolen his treasure. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-548" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-549" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript definitely assigns this stanza to Völund, but many editors give the first two lines to Nithuth. In the manuscript stanza 16 is followed by the two lines of stanza 2, and many editions make of lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 16 and stanza 2 a single speech by Völund. <dfn>Grani’s way</dfn>: Grani was Sigurth’s horse, on which he rode to slay Fafnir and win Andvari’s hoard; this and the reference to the <dfn>Rhine</dfn> as the home of wealth betray the southern source of the story. If lines 1⁠–⁠2 belong to Völund, they mean that Nithuth got his wealth in the Rhine country, and that Völund’s hoard has nothing to do with it; if the speaker is Nithuth, they mean that Völund presumably has not killed a dragon, and that he is far from the wealth of the Rhine, so that he must have stolen his treasure from Nithuth himself. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-549" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-550" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 1 is lacking in the manuscript, lines 2⁠–⁠4 following immediately after the two lines here given as stanza 2. Line 1, borrowed from line 1 of stanza 32, is placed here by many editors, following Bugge’s suggestion. Certainly it is Nithuth’s wife who utters line 4. <dfn>Who comes from the wood</dfn>: Völund, noted as a hunter. Gering assumes that with the entrance of Nithuth’s wife the scene has changed from Völund’s house to Nithuth’s, but I cannot see that this is necessary. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-550" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-551" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The annotator inserted this note rather clumsily in the midst of the speech of Nithuth’s wife. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-551" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-552" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript lines 2⁠–⁠3 stand before line 1; many editors have made the transposition here indicated. Some editors reject line 3 as spurious. <dfn>Sævarstath</dfn>: “Sea-Stead.” <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-552" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-553" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza is obviously in bad shape. Vigfusson makes two stanzas of it by adding a first line:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Then did Völund speak,</span>
								<span>sagest of elves.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Editors have rejected various lines, and some have regrouped the last lines with the first two of stanza 20. The elimination of the passages in parenthesis produces a four-line stanza which is metrically correct, but it has little more than guesswork to support it. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-553" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-554" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The editions vary radically in combining the lines of this stanza with those of stanzas 19 and 21, particularly as the manuscript indicates the third line as the beginning of a stanza. The meaning, however, remains unchanged. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-554" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-555" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Several editions make one stanza out of lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 20 and lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 21, and another out of the next four lines. <dfn>The evil was open</dfn>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, the gold in the chest was destined to be their undoing. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-555" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-556" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, and several editors have adopted this grouping. In the <i xml:lang="non">Thithrekssaga</i> Völund sends the boys away with instructions not to come back until just after a fall of snow, and then to approach his dwelling walking backward. The boys do this, and when, after he has killed them, Völund is questioned regarding them, he points to the tracks in the snow as evidence that they had left his house. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-556" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-557" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap indicated in the manuscript. Some editors assume it, as here; some group the lines with lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 22, and some with lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 24. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-557" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-558" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions begin a new stanza with line 3. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-558" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-559" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, and many editors have adopted this grouping. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-559" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-560" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These two lines have been grouped in various ways, either with lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 25 or with the fragmentary stanza 27. No gap is indicated in the manuscript, but the loss of something is so obvious that practically all editors have noted it, although they have differed as to the number of lines lost. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-560" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-561" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap indicated in the manuscript; the line and a half might be filled out (partly with the aid of late paper manuscripts) thus:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“But soon it broke,</span>
								<span>and swiftly to Völund</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>She bore it and said⁠—” <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-561" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-562" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name Völund as the speaker before line 3; Vigfusson again inserts his convenient line,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Then Völund spake,</span>
								<span>sagest of elves.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>A few editions combine lines 3⁠–⁠4 with the two lines of stanza 30. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-562" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-563" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap indicated in the manuscript; some editors combine the two lines with lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 29, and many with the three lines of stanza 31. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-563" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-564" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Something has probably been lost before this stanza, explaining how Völund made himself wings, as otherwise, owing to his lameness, he could not leave the island. The <i xml:lang="non">Thithrekssaga</i> tells the story of how Völund’s brother, Egil, shot birds and gave him the feathers, out of which he made a feather-garment. This break in the narrative illustrates the lack of knowledge apparently possessed by the compiler who was responsible for the prose notes; had he known the story told in the <i xml:lang="non">Thithrekssaga</i>, it is hardly conceivable that he would have failed to indicate the necessary connecting link at this point. Some editors reject line 3 as spurious. The manuscript does not indicate any lacuna. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-564" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-565" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 4 as the beginning of a stanza, and many editors have followed this arrangement. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-565" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-566" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name the speaker. It indicates line 3 as the beginning of a new stanza. Vigfusson adds before line 1,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Then spake Nithuth,</span>
								<span>lord of the Njars.” <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-566" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-567" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap indicated in the manuscript, but it seems clear that something has been lost. Some editors combine these two lines with lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 33. Völund is now flying over Nithuth’s hall. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-567" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-568" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name the speaker; Vigfusson again makes two full stanzas with the line,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Then did Völund speak,</span>
								<span>sagest of elves.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Some editors begin a new stanza with line 4, while others reject as interpolations lines 2⁠–⁠3 or 5⁠–⁠7. <dfn>Völund’s wife</dfn>: the reference is to Bothvild, as Völund wishes to have his vengeance fall more heavily on her father than on her. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-568" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-569" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 3⁠–⁠4 are nearly identical with lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 24. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-569" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-570" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Identical, except for the pronouns, with stanza 25. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-570" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-571" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 1⁠–⁠2: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 26. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-571" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-572" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name the speaker. Either line 4 or line 5 may be an interpolation; two editions reject lines 3⁠–⁠5, combining lines 1⁠–⁠2 with stanza 40. In the <i xml:lang="non">Thithrekssaga</i> Nithuth actually compels Egil, Völund’s brother, to shoot at Völund. The latter has concealed a bladder full of blood under his left arm, and when his brother’s arrow pierces this, Nithuth assumes that his enemy has been killed. This episode likewise appears among the scenes from Völund’s career rudely carved on an ancient casket of ivory, bearing an Anglo-Saxon inscription in runic letters, which has been preserved. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-572" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-573" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 1: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 31. The manuscript indicates no lacuna. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-573" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-574" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first line is a conjectural addition. <dfn>Thakkrath</dfn> is probably the northern form of the Middle High German name Dancrat. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-574" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-575" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates no gap, but indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza; Vigfusson’s added</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Then Nithuth spake,</span>
								<span>lord of the Njars”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>seems plausible enough. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-575" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-576" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name the speaker. Different editors have rejected one or another of the last three lines, and as the manuscript indicates line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, the loss of two or three lines has likewise been suggested. According to the <i xml:lang="non">Thithrekssaga</i>, the son of Völund and Bothvild was Vithga, or Witege, one of the heroes of Dietrich of Bern. <a href="volundarkvitha.xhtml#noteref-576" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar -->
				<li id="note-577" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript the subtitle, “Of Hjorvarth and Sigrlin,” stands as the title for the whole poem, though it clearly applies only to the first five stanzas. Most editions employ the title here given. <dfn>Hjorvarth</dfn>: the name is a not uncommon one; there are two men of that name mentioned in the mythical-heroic genealogies of the <i xml:lang="non">Hyndluljoth</i> (stanzas 23 and 28), and Hjorvarth appears in <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> (stanza 14) and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> (prose after stanza 12) as a son of Hunding. This particular Hjorvarth is called by the annotator, but not directly so in the verse, a king of Norway. The name means “Sword-Guardian.” <dfn>Four wives</dfn>: polygamy, while very infrequent, appears occasionally in the Norse sagas. <dfn>Alfhild</dfn>: “Elf-Warrior.” <dfn>Hethin</dfn>: “Fur-Clothed” (?). <dfn>Særeith</dfn>: “Sea-Rider.” <dfn>Sinrjoth</dfn>: “Ever-Red.” The fourth wife, not here named, may be Sigrlin. It has been suggested that Særeith and Sinrjoth may be northern and southern forms of the same name, as also <dfn>Humlung</dfn> and <dfn>Hymling</dfn>, their sons. <dfn>Svafnir</dfn>: the annotator calls him king of Svavaland, apparently a place on the mainland which could be reached from Norway either by land or by sea. <dfn>Sigrlin</dfn>: “The Conquering Serpent.” <dfn>Atli</dfn>: Norse form of the Gothic Attila (Etzel). <dfn>Alof</dfn>: perhaps a feminine form of Olaf. <dfn>A bird</dfn>: compare the counsel given by the birds to Sigurth after the slaying of Fafnir (<i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>, stanzas 32⁠–⁠38). This is one of the many curious resemblances between the Helgi and the Sigurth stories. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-577" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-578" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Glasir’s wood</dfn>: Snorri in the <i xml:lang="non">Skaldskaparmal</i> quotes a half stanza to the effect that “Glasir stands with golden leaves before Othin’s hall,” and calls it “the fairest wood among gods and men.” The phrase as used here seems to mean little. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-578" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-579" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The bird’s demands would indicate that it is in reality one of the gods. <dfn>Gold-horned cattle</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Thrymskvitha</i>, 23. There are other references to gilding the horns of cattle, particularly for sacrificial purposes. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-579" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-580" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The annotator contradicts himself here, as he had already stated that Atli was on his way home. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-580" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-581" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Possibly the remains of two stanzas, or perhaps a line has been added. <dfn>Sæmorn</dfn>: this river is nowhere else mentioned. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-581" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-582" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sigrlin and Alof, protected by the latter’s father, Franmar, have fled before the ravaging army of Sigrlin’s rejected suitor, Hrothmar. The beginning of a new section (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>) is indicated in the manuscript only by the unusually large capital letter with which “Hjorvarth” begins. <dfn>No name</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: this probably means that Helgi had always been so silent that he would answer to no name, with the result that he had none. <dfn>Valkyries</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 31 and note. The annotator insists here and in the prose after stanza 9 that Svava was a Valkyrie, but there is nothing in the verse to prove it, or, indeed, to identify the Svava of the last section of the poem with the person who gave Helgi his name. In the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> Sigmund himself names his son Helgi, and gives him a sword, following <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-582" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-583" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Battle-tree</dfn>: poetic phrase for “warrior.” <dfn>Shining fields</dfn>: the words in the manuscript may form a proper name, Rothulsvoll, having this meaning. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-583" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-584" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gift</dfn>: not only was it customary to give gifts with the naming of a child, but the practice frequently obtained when a permanent epithet was added to the name of an adult. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-584" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-585" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sigarsholm</dfn> (“Isle of Sigar”): a place not identified, but probably related to the Sigarsvoll where Helgi was slain (stanza 35). <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-585" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-586" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The sword is carved with magic runes and with snakes. <dfn>Fame</dfn>: the original word is uncertain. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-586" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-587" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Eylimi</dfn>: this name is another link with the Sigurth story, as it is likewise the name of the father of Sigurth’s mother, Hjordis. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-587" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-588" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With this stanza begins a new episode, that of Helgi’s victory over King Hrothmar, who had killed his mother’s father (<abbr>cf.</abbr> prose after stanza 5). It has been suggested, in consequence, that stanzas 10⁠–⁠11 may be a separate fragment. The verse tells nothing of the battle, merely giving Helgi’s reproaches to his father for having left Svafnir’s death and the burning of Svavaland unavenged. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-588" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-589" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate any break, but the episode which forms the basis of the <i xml:lang="non">Hrimgertharmol</i> (stanzas 12⁠–⁠30) clearly begins with the slaying of the giant Hati (“The Hateful”). <dfn>Hatafjord</dfn>: “Hati’s Fjord.” <dfn>Hrimgerth</dfn>: “Frost-Shrouded” (?). <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-589" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-590" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Iron</dfn>: the keels of Norse ships were sometimes fitted with iron “shoes” at bow and stern, but it is not certain that this practice much antedated the year 1000, and thus this line has raised some question as to the antiquity of this stanza, if not of the entire <i xml:lang="non">Hrimgertharmol</i>, which may have been composed as late as the eleventh century. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-590" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-591" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speaker. The pun on “Atli” and “atall” (meaning “ill”) is untranslatable. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-591" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-592" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speaker. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-592" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-593" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From this point to the end the manuscript does not indicate the speakers. <dfn>Ron</dfn>: wife of the sea-god Ægir, who draws drowning men into the sea with her net. There is no other reference to the wounding of Hrimgerth. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-593" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-594" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apparently both Hrimgerth and her mother, Hati’s wife, had sought to destroy Helgi’s ships, and had actually killed some of his companions, the sons of <dfn>Hlothvarth</dfn>, concerning whom nothing more is known. Many editors assume that a stanza containing a speech by Atli has been lost after stanza 19. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-594" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-595" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apparently Hrimgerth has assumed the form of a mare. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-595" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-596" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Varin’s cove</dfn>: the name of Varin appears twice in place names in <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i> (stanzas 27 and 39). The sagas mention a mythical King Varin who lived at Skorustrond in Rogaland (Norway). <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-596" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-597" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Of the giant <dfn>Lothin</dfn> (“The Shaggy”) and his home in <dfn>Tholley</dfn> (“Pine Island”) nothing is known. <abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, 35. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-597" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-598" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Something is clearly wrong with this stanza, and the manuscript indicates line 6 as the beginning of a new one. Perhaps a line (between lines 4 and 5) has been lost, or perhaps the lines in parenthesis are interpolations. Hrimgerth here refers to Svava, or to the protectress with whom the annotator has identified her, as having saved Helgi and his ships from the vengeance of the giantesses. In the original line 1 includes Helgi’s name, which makes it metrically incorrect. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-598" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-599" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Again something is clearly wrong, and the last three lines look like interpolations, though some editors have tried to reconstruct two full stanzas. The passage suggests the identification of the Valkyries with the clouds. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-599" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-600" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions give this speech to Helgi. <dfn>Eastward</dfn>: Atli and Helgi have held Hrimgerth in talk till sunrise, and the sun’s rays turn her into stone. But dwarfs rather than giants were the victims of sunlight; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Alvissmol</i>, stanzas 16 and 35. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-600" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-601" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Most editions give this stanza to Atli. With this the <i xml:lang="non">Hrimgertharmol</i> ends, and after the next prose passage the meter reverts to that of the earlier sections. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-601" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-602" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate a new section of the poem. <dfn>Eylimi</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on prose after stanza 9. <dfn>Valkyrie</dfn>: here, as before, the annotator has apparently nothing but his own imagination on which to base his statement. Svava in the ensuing stanzas certainly does not behave like a Valkyrie. <dfn>Norway</dfn>: the annotator doubtless based this statement on the reference to Norway in line 2 of stanza 31. <dfn>Yule-eve</dfn>: the Yule feast, marking the new year, was a great event in the heathen North. It was a time of feasting and merrymaking, vows (“New Year’s resolutions”), ghosts and witches; the spirits had their greatest power on Yule-eve. <dfn>The king’s toast</dfn>: vows made at the passing of the king’s cup at the Yule feast were particularly sacred. <dfn>Sacred boar</dfn>: a boar consecrated to Freyr, an integral part of the Yule rites. Hethin’s vow, which is, of course, the vengeance of the troll-woman, is too sacred to be broken, but he immediately realizes the horror of his oath. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-602" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-603" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>From Norway</dfn>: Bugge uses this phrase as evidence that the poem was composed in one of the Icelandic settlements of the western islands, but as the annotator himself seems to have thought that Hethin came to Helgi by land (“on wild paths southward”), this argument does not appear to have much weight. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-603" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-604" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The second line is conjectural; a line has clearly been lost from this stanza, and various emendations have been suggested. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-604" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-605" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Perhaps this is the remnant of two stanzas, or perhaps two lines (probably the ones in parenthesis) have been interpolated. <dfn>The isle</dfn>: duels were commonly fought on islands, probably to guard against treacherous interference, whence the usual name for a duel was “isle-going.” A duel was generally fought three days after the challenge. Reckoning the lapse of time by nights instead of days was a common practice throughout the German and Scandinavian peoples. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-605" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-606" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors place all or part of this prose passage after stanza 35. <dfn>Following-spirits</dfn>: the “fylgja” was a female guardian spirit whose appearance generally betokened death. The belief was common throughout the North, and has come down to recent times in Scottish and Irish folklore. Individuals and sometimes whole families had these following-spirits, but it was most unusual for a person to have more than one of them. <dfn>Alf</dfn>: son of the Hrothmar who killed Helgi’s grandfather, and who was in turn later killed by Helgi. <dfn>Sigarsvoll</dfn> (“Sigar’s Field”): <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 8 and note; the Sigar in question may be the man who appears as Helgi’s messenger in stanzas 36⁠–⁠39. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-606" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-607" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sigar</dfn> (“The Victorious”): <abbr>cf.</abbr> the foregoing note. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-607" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-608" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Frekastein</dfn> (“Wolf-Crag”): the name appears several times in the Helgi lays applied to battlefields; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, 46 and 55, and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 18 and 24. <dfn>Need</dfn>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Alf deserves no credit for the victory, which was due to the troll-woman’s magic. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-608" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-609" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>One or two editors ascribe this stanza to Hethin. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-609" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-610" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A few editions make the extraordinary blunder of ascribing this speech to the dying Helgi. The point, of course, is that Hethin will satisfy Svava’s vow by becoming famous as the slayer of Alf. <dfn>Rogheim</dfn> (“Home of Battle”) and <dfn>Rothulsfjoll</dfn> (“Sun-Mountain”): nowhere else mentioned; Hethin means simply that he will not come back to Svava till he has won fame. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-610" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-611" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Regarding this extraordinary bit see the prose note at the end of <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>. Gering thinks the reborn Helgi Hjorvarthsson was Helgi Hundingsbane, while Svava, according to the annotator himself, became Sigrun. The point seems to be simply that there were so many Helgi stories current, and the hero died in so many irreconcilable ways, that tradition had to have him born over again, not once only but several times, to accommodate his many deaths, and to avoid splitting him up into several Helgis. Needless to say, the poems themselves know nothing of this rebirth, and we owe the suggestion entirely to the annotator, who probably got it from current tradition. <a href="helgakvitha-hjorvarthssonar.xhtml#noteref-611" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I -->
				<li id="note-612" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript contains the superscription: “Here begins the lay of Helgi Hundingsbane and h. (Hothbrodd?) The lay of the Volsungs.” <dfn>Eagles</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: the screaming of eagles and water pouring from heaven were portents of the birth of a hero. <dfn>Borghild</dfn>: Sigmund’s first wife; <dfn>Bralund</dfn> was her home, not Sigmund’s. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-612" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-613" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Norns</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 20 and note. Here it is the Norns who preside over Helgi’s early destiny, and not a Valkyrie, as in <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar</i>. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-613" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-614" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 2 is largely guesswork, the manuscript being obscure. <dfn>Moon’s hall</dfn>: the sky. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-614" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-615" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>East</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: the Norns give Helgi fame in the East, West, and North; in the North his renown is particularly to endure. This suggests that the poet was aware of the spread of the Helgi story over many lands. <dfn>Neri’s kinswoman</dfn>: evidently one of the Norns, but nothing further is known of Neri, and the word may not be a proper name at all. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-615" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-616" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates no gap, but it looks as though something had been lost after line 2. <dfn>Ylfings’ son</dfn>: Sigmund is evidently meant, though calling him an Ylfing (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hyndluljoth</i>, 11 and note) is a manifest error. Helgi, in the tradition as it came from Denmark, was undoubtedly an Ylfing, and the poet, in order to combine the two legends, has to treat the Ylfings and Volsungs as if they were the same family. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-616" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-617" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sigmund</dfn>: the chief link between the Helgi and Sigurth stories. He was the son of Volsung, great-grandson of Othin. His children by his first wife, Borghild, were Helgi and Hamund (belonging to the Helgi cycle); his son by his second wife, Hjordis, was Sigurth. An incestuous connection with his sister, Signy (<abbr>cf.</abbr> Wagner’s Siegmund and Sieglinde) resulted in the birth of Sinfjotli (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i> and note). <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-617" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-618" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The king</dfn>: Sigmund, who gives his son a symbol of the lands which he bestows on him. Regarding the leek, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 4; <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, 17, and <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i>, 7. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-618" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-619" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hringstathir</dfn> (“Ring-Stead”): quite possibly the historical Ringsted, long a possession of the Danish kings, and thus a relic of the old Helgi tradition. <dfn>Hringstoth</dfn> may be another form of the same name. <dfn>Solfjoll</dfn> (“Sun-Mountain”) and <dfn>Snæfjoll</dfn> (“Snow-Mountain”) are fictitious names. Regarding <dfn>Sigarsvoll</dfn> <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar</i>, stanzas 8 and 35. Saxo mentions a Danish king named Sigar, and the frequency with which the name appears in the Helgi poems may be taken as a reminiscence of Denmark. <dfn>Hotun</dfn> (“High Place”): possibly the village of Tune in Seeland. <dfn>Himinvangar</dfn> (“Heaven’s Field”): an imaginary place. <dfn>Blood-snake</dfn>: a sword. <dfn>Sinfjotli</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 6. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-619" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-620" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Elm</dfn>: a not uncommon word for “man.” <dfn>Blood-flecked</dfn>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, won in battle. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-620" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-621" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Fifteen</dfn>: until early in the eleventh century a Norwegian or Icelandic boy became “of age” at twelve, and Maurer cites this passage as added proof of the poem’s lateness. <dfn>Hunding</dfn>: the annotator (introductory prose to <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>) calls him king of Hundland, which shows no great originality. Saxo mentions a Hunding who was a Saxon king ruling in Jutland, probably the origin of Helgi’s traditional foe. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-621" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-622" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Storm</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: war. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-622" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-623" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Logafjoll</dfn> (“Flame-Mountain”): a mythical name. <dfn>Frothi</dfn>: a: traditional king of Denmark, whose peaceful reign was so famous that “Frothi’s peace” became a byword for peace of any kind. <dfn>Vithrir’s hounds</dfn>: wolves; Vithrir is Othin, and his hounds are the wolves Freki and Geri. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-623" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-624" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In this poem Helgi kills all the sons of Hunding, but in the poems of the Sigurth cycle, and the prose notes attached thereto, Sigmund and his father-in-law, Eylimi, are killed by Hunding’s sons, on whom Sigurth subsequently takes vengeance (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i> and <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i>). <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-624" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-625" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap indicated in the manuscript, but almost certainly something has been lost mentioning more specifically the coming of the Valkyries. The lightning which accompanies them suggests again their identification with the clouds (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar</i>, 28). <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-625" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-626" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions fill out the first line: “He saw there mighty maidens riding.” The manuscript indicates line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-626" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-627" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Wolf-wood</dfn>: dark forest; the original word is not altogether clear. <dfn>Southern</dfn>: this variety of Valkyrie, like the swan-maidens of the <i xml:lang="non">Völundarkvitha</i>, was clearly regarded as of southern (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, German) origin. Here again there is a confusion of traditions; the Valkyries of the <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i> were as essentially Norse as any part of the older mythology. I doubt if a poet much earlier than the author of the first Helgi Hundingsbane lay would have made his Sigrun, daughter of Hogni, a Valkyrie. It is to be noted that the same complication appears in the Sigurth story, where the undoubted Valkyrie, Brynhild-Sigrdrifa (the latter name is really only an epithet) is hopelessly mixed up with the quite human Brynhild, daughter of Buthli. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-627" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-628" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Breaker of rings</dfn>: generous prince, because the breaking of rings was the customary form of distributing gold. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-628" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-629" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Granmar</dfn>: the annotator gives an account of him and his family in the prose following stanza 12 of <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.</i> <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-629" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-630" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap indicated in the manuscript; some editors combine the stanza with the fragmentary stanza 21, and others fill in with</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“And home will carry</span>
								<span>Hogni’s daughter.” <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-630" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-631" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript has only lines 1 and 4 with the word “first” of line 2, and does not indicate Helgi as the speaker. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>, which follows this poem pretty closely, expands Helgi’s speech, and lines 2⁠–⁠3 are conjectural versifications of the saga’s prose. <dfn>Isung</dfn>: nothing is known of him beyond the fact, here indicated, that Hothbrodd killed him. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-631" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-632" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Water’s gleam</dfn>: gold. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-632" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-633" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Brandey</dfn> (“Brand-Isle”): not mentioned elsewhere. <dfn>Hethinsey</dfn> (“Hethin’s Isle”): possibly the island of Hiddensee, east of Rügen. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-633" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-634" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Stafnsnes</dfn> (“Steersman’s Cape”): an unidentifiable promontory. <dfn>Fair</dfn>: a guess, as the adjective in the manuscript is obscure. <dfn>Hjorleif</dfn> does not appear elsewhere, and seems to be simply one of Helgi’s lieutenants. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-634" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-635" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Tronueyr</dfn>: “Crane-Strand.” <dfn>Long-stemmed</dfn>: literally “long-headed,” as the high, curving stem of a Norse ship was often carved to represent a head and neck. <dfn>Orvasund</dfn>: almost certainly the Danish Öresund, off Seeland. Such bits of geography as this followed Helgi persistently. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-635" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-636" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap indicated in the manuscript. <dfn>Hotun</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 8 and note. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-636" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-637" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 3 seems to have been interpolated from line 4 of <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 42. <dfn>Ship’s-tents</dfn>: the awnings spread over the deck to shelter the crews from sun and rain when the ships were at anchor. <dfn>Varinsfjord</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar</i>, 22 and note. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-637" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-638" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a new stanza, and some editions follow this arrangement, making lines 1⁠–⁠2 a separate stanza. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-638" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-639" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates no gap, and some editions combine the stanza with lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 28. <dfn>Sisters of Kolga</dfn>: the waves, Kolga (“The Gold”) being one of the daughters of the sea-god, Ægir. As the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> says, “Now there was a great storm.” <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-639" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-640" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Helgi demonstrates his courage, whatever one may think of his seamanship. <dfn>Ægir’s daughters</dfn>: the waves; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 29 and note. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-640" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-641" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sigrun here appears again as a Valkyrie. <dfn>Ron</dfn>: Ægir’s wife; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar</i>, 18 and note. <dfn>Sea-beast</dfn>: ship. <dfn>Gnipalund</dfn>: “Crag-Wood.” <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-641" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-642" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Unavagar</dfn>: “Friendly Waves.” <dfn>Svarin’s hill</dfn>: the hill where Granmar had his dwelling. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-642" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-643" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here begins the long dialogue between <dfn>Gothmund</dfn>, one of Granmar’s sons, and <dfn>Sinfjotli</dfn>, Helgi’s half-brother. Two lines (stanza 33, lines 3⁠–⁠4) are quoted by the annotator in the prose note following stanza 16 of the second Helgi Hundingsbane lay, and the dialogue, in much abbreviated form, together with Helgi’s admonition to Sinfjotli to cease talking, is closely paralleled in stanzas 22⁠–⁠27 of that poem. It has been suggested that this whole passage (stanzas 33⁠–⁠48) is an interpolation, perhaps from “the Old Volsung lay.” This may be, but it seems more probable that the poet used an older poem simply as the basis for this passage, borrowing a little but making up a great deal more. The manuscript indicates no gap in stanza 33. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-643" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-644" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sinfjotli</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 6. <dfn>Red</dfn>: raising a red shield was the signal for war. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-644" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-645" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Ylfings</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 5 and note. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-645" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-646" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Quern</dfn>: turning the hand mill was, throughout antiquity, the task of slaves. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-646" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-647" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name the speakers in this dialogue. No gap indicated in the manuscript, and editors have attempted various combinations of stanzas 37 and 38. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-647" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-648" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Wolves</dfn>: the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> tells that Sigmund and Sinfjotli lived in the woods for a time as werewolves. <dfn>Brothers</dfn>: Sinfjotli killed the two sons of his mother, Signy, and her husband, Siggeir, as part of the vengeance wreaked on Siggeir for the treacherous murder of Sigmund’s father, Volsung, and nine of his brothers (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i> and note). The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a new stanza. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-648" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-649" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Varin’s isle</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 27 and note, and <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar</i>, 22. Reproaching a man with having been a woman and borne children was not uncommon. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-649" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-650" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza may be an interpolation in the dialogue passage. <dfn>Allfather</dfn>: Othin. We have no information regarding Gothmund’s career, but it looks as though Sinfjotli were drawing solely on his imagination for his taunts, whereas Gothmund’s insults have a basis in Sinfjotli’s previous life. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-650" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-651" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap indicated in the manuscript; some editors combine the two lines with stanza 40, some regard them as the first instead of the last lines of a separate stanza, and some assume the lacuna here indicated. <dfn>Sogunes</dfn> (“Saga’s Cape”): of the goddess Saga little is known; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 7. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-651" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-652" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Fenrir’s-wolves</dfn>: wolves in general. <dfn>Thorsnes</dfn>: “Thor’s Cape.” <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-652" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-653" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The phrase “under houses,” which follows the manuscript, may be an error for “in wolf-caves.” Line 3 (or 4) may be an interpolation. The manuscript indicates line 5 as the beginning of a new stanza. <dfn>Siggeir</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 38, note. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-653" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-654" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Several editions assign this stanza to Sinfjotli instead of to Gothmund. <dfn>Bravoll</dfn> (“Field of the Brow”): not elsewhere mentioned in the poems. <dfn>Grani</dfn>: Sigurth’s horse (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Völundarkvitha</i>, 16 and note); Gothmund means that Sinfjotli had turned into a mare, after the fashion of Loki (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 44, note). The meaning of line 4 in the original is uncertain. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-654" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-655" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A few editions give this stanza to Gothmund. <dfn>Gollnir</dfn>: possibly a giant. <dfn>Imth</dfn>: nothing is known of him or his daughter. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-655" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-656" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A few editions give this stanza to Sinfjotli. <dfn>Frekastein</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar</i>, 39 and note. A stanza may have been lost after stanza 46, parallel to stanza 25 of the second Helgi Hundingsbane lay. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-656" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-657" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Ring-breakers</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 18 and note. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-657" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-658" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Moinsheimar</dfn>: a battlefield of which nothing is known, where, however, the sons of Granmar appear to have fought bravely. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-658" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-659" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here the scene shifts to the shore among Hothbrodd’s followers. <dfn>Sviputh</dfn> and <dfn>Sveggjuth</dfn> (“Swift” and “Lithe”): horses’ names. <dfn>Mist’s horse</dfn>: the Valkyrie’s name is the same as the English word “mist,” and the “horse” on which the mist rides is the earth. The two lines in parenthesis may be interpolated, or line 5 may begin a new stanza, as the manuscript indicates. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-659" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-660" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap indicated in the manuscript. <dfn>Hniflungs</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> introductory note. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-660" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-661" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 2⁠–⁠3 may be interpolated, or a new stanza may begin, as the manuscript indicates, with line 5. Many editors combine lines 5⁠–⁠6 with all or part of stanza 52. Possibly Gothmund is not the speaker. <dfn>Mast-ring harts</dfn>: ships, so called from the ring attaching the yard to the mast. <dfn>Ylfings</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 5 and note. <dfn>Sogn</dfn>: this name, which actually belongs in western Norway, seems to have been used here with no particular significance. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-661" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-662" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 3 as beginning a new stanza; some editors combine lines 3⁠–⁠4 with all or part of stanza 53, while others assume the loss of two lines following line 4. <dfn>Fire-beasts</dfn>: dragons, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, ships. The Norse ships of war, as distinguished from merchant vessels, were often called dragons because of their shape and the carving of their stems. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-662" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-663" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speaker, and a few editors assume the loss of one or two lines embodying the phrase “Hothbrodd spake.” In the manuscript line 3, which many editors have suspected of being spurious, stands before line 2. Possibly lines 4⁠–⁠5 are the remains of a separate stanza. <dfn>Reginthing</dfn> (“The Great Council”): apparently the council-place for the whole country, as distinct from the local council, or “herathsthing.” <dfn>Melnir</dfn> (“Bit-Bearer”), <dfn>Mylnir</dfn> (“The Biter”) and <dfn>Sporvitnir</dfn> (“Spur-Wolf”): horses’ names. <dfn>Myrkwood</dfn>: a not uncommon name for a dark forest; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Lokasenna</i>, 42, and <i xml:lang="non">Atlakvitha</i>, 3. <dfn>Sparinsheith</dfn> (“Sparin’s Heath”): nothing more is known of Sparin or his heath. <dfn>Flame of wounds</dfn>: sword. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-663" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-664" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hogni</dfn>: the father of Sigrun; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 18. Of <dfn>Hring</dfn> and his sons nothing further is known. <dfn>Volsungs</dfn>: here for the first time the poet gives Helgi and Sinfjotli the family name to which, as sons of Sigmund Volsungsson, they are entitled. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-664" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-665" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 5 as the beginning of a new stanza, but many editors have rejected lines 5⁠–⁠6 as spurious, while others regard them as the first half of a stanza the last two lines of which have been lost. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-665" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-666" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Wound-givers</dfn>: probably this means “Valkyries,” but there is considerable doubt as to the original word. <dfn>Horse</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, the wolf (because giantesses customarily had wolves for their steeds) ate corpses (the food of birds of prey). <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-666" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-667" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Yngvi</dfn>: one of the sons of Halfdan the Old, and traditional ancestor of the Ynglings, with whom the Ylfings seem to have been confused (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hyndluljoth</i>, 11 and note). The confusion between the Ylfings (or Ynglings) and Volsungs was carried far enough so that Sigurth himself is once called a descendant of Yngvi (<i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i>, 14). Gering identifies the name of Yngvi with the god Freyr, but the Volsungs certainly claimed descent from Othin, not Freyr, and there is nothing to indicate that Helgi in the Danish tradition was supposed to be descended from Freyr, whereas his descent from Yngvi Halfdansson fits well with the rest of his story. However, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 24 and note. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-667" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-668" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This entire stanza may be an interpolation; nearly every edition has a different way of dealing with it. <dfn>Hringstathir</dfn>: as this place had been given to Helgi by his father (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 8 and note), the poet has apparently made a mistake in naming it here as a conquest from Granmar’s sons, unless, indeed, they had previously captured it from Helgi, which seems unlikely. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-1.xhtml#noteref-668" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II -->
				<li id="note-669" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript the poem is headed “Of the Volsungs,” but most editions give it the title used here. <dfn>Sigmund</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 6 and note, which also mentions <dfn>Volsung</dfn>, <dfn>Borghild</dfn> and <dfn>Bralund</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 1 and note. <dfn>Helgi</dfn>: the annotator’s explanation that the child was named after Helgi Hjorvarthsson is a naive way of getting around the difficulties created by the two sets of Helgi stories. He might equally well have said that the new Helgi was the old one born again, as he accounts for Sigrun in this way (“she was Svava reborn”). <dfn>Hagal</dfn>: not elsewhere mentioned; it was a common custom to have boys brought up by foster-parents. <dfn>Hunding</dfn> and <dfn>Hundland</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 10 and note. <dfn>Volsungs</dfn> and <dfn>Ylfings</dfn>: regarding this confusion of family names <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 5 and note. <dfn>Hæming</dfn>: his name does not appear in the list of Hunding’s sons. It is quite possible that these opening stanzas (1⁠–⁠4) do not refer to Hunding at all. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-669" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-670" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Helgi appears to have stayed with Hunding under the name of Hamal, but now, thinking himself safe, he sends word of who he really is. <dfn>Hunding</dfn>: it has been suggested that the compiler may have inserted this name to fit what he thought the story ought to be, in place of Hæming, or even Hadding. If stanzas 1⁠–⁠4 are a fragment of the <i xml:lang="non">Karuljoth</i> (“Lay of Kara”), this latter suggestion is quite reasonable, for in that poem, which we do not possess, but which supplied material for the compilers of the <i xml:lang="non">Hromundar saga Greipssonar</i>, Helgi appears as Helgi Haddingjaskati (<abbr>cf.</abbr> final prose note). Nothing beyond this one name connects stanzas 1⁠–⁠4 with Hunding. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-670" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-671" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hagal</dfn>: Helgi’s foster-father, who naturally protects him. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-671" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-672" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 2 as the beginning of the stanza, the copyist evidently regarding line 1 as prose. This has caused various rearrangements in the different editions. <dfn>Blind</dfn>: leader of the band sent to capture Helgi. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-672" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-673" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza. <dfn>Barley</dfn>: the word literally means “foreign grain,” and would afford an interesting study to students of early commerce. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-673" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-674" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Possibly two stanzas with one line lost, or perhaps the lines in parenthesis are spurious; each editor has his own guess. <dfn>Sigar</dfn> and <dfn>Hogni</dfn>: it seems unlikely that Hagal refers to the Hogni who was Sigrun’s father, for this part of the story has nothing whatever to do with Sigrun. As Hagal is, of course, deliberately lying, it is useless to test any part of his speech for accuracy. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-674" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-675" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No division indicated in the manuscript. <dfn>Brunavagar</dfn> (“Bruni’s Sea”): mentioned only in this section. <dfn>Strand-slaughtering</dfn>: a killing on the shore of cattle stolen in a raid. <dfn>Hogni</dfn> and <dfn>Sigrun</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 17 and note; the annotator’s notion of Sigrun as the reincarnated Svava (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar</i>, concluding prose note) represents a naive form of scholarship. There is nothing in stanzas 5⁠–⁠12 which clearly identifies Sigrun as a Valkyrie, or which, except for the last line of stanza 12, identifies the speaker as Sigrun. Some editors, therefore, call her simply “the Valkyrie,” while Vigfusson, who thinks this section is also a remnant of the <i xml:lang="non">Karuljoth</i>, calls her Kara. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-675" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-676" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speakers. <dfn>Hamal</dfn>: Helgi’s assumption of this name seems to link this section (stanzas 5⁠–⁠12) with stanza 1. <dfn>Hlesey</dfn> (“Island of Hler”⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Ægir, the sea-god): generally identified as the Danish island of Läsö; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 37 and note. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-676" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-677" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Guth</dfn>: a Valkyrie (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 31); the birds of her sisters are the kites and ravens. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-677" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-678" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 5 as the beginning of a new stanza; some editors reject lines 1⁠–⁠2, while others make lines 5⁠–⁠6 into a fragmentary stanza. <dfn>Ylfings</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> introductory prose and note. <dfn>Bragalund</dfn> (“Bragi’s Wood”): a mythical place. <dfn>Bears</dfn>: presumably Berserkers, regarding whom <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hyndluljoth</i>, 23. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-678" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-679" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Helgi’s meaning in lines 3⁠–⁠4 is that, although he has already declared himself an Ylfing (stanza 8, line 1), there are many heroes of that race, and he does not understand how Sigrun knows him to be Helgi. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-679" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-680" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Slaughter-runes</dfn>: equivocal or deceptive speech regarding the battle. The word “rune” had the meaning of “magic” or “mystery” long before it was applied to the signs or characters with which it was later identified. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-680" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-681" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors reject line 3, others line 5. The manuscript omits Helgi’s name in line 5, thereby destroying both the sense and the meter. Vigfusson, following his <i xml:lang="non">Karuljoth</i> theory (<abbr>cf.</abbr> note on prose following stanza 4), changes Hogni to Halfdan, father of Kara. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-681" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-682" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates no division. Most of this prose passage is evidently based on <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>; the only new features are the introduction of <dfn>Starkath</dfn> as a third son of Granmar, which is clearly an error based on a misunderstanding of stanza 19, and the reference to the <dfn>kings’ meeting</dfn>, based on stanza 15. Kings’ meetings, or councils, were by no means unusual; the North in early days was prolific in kings. For the remaining names, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>: <dfn>Granmar</dfn>, stanza 19; <dfn>Hothbrodd</dfn>, stanza 19; <dfn>Gothmund</dfn>, stanza 33; <dfn>Svarin’s hill</dfn>, stanza 32; <dfn>Logafjoll</dfn>, stanza 13; <dfn>Alf</dfn>, <dfn>Eyjolf</dfn>, <dfn>Hjorvarth</dfn> and <dfn>Hervarth</dfn>, stanza 14. <dfn>The old Volsung lay</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> Introductory Note. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-682" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-683" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions combine lines 3⁠–⁠4, or line 4, with part of stanza 14. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-683" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-684" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The lines of stanzas 14 and 15 are here rearranged in accordance with Bugge’s emendation; in the manuscript they stand as follows: lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 14; stanza 15; lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 14. This confusion has given rise to various editorial conjectures. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-684" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-685" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates no division. Here again, the annotator has drawn practically all his information from <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, which he specifically mentions and even quotes. The only new features are the names of Hogni’s sons, <dfn>Bragi</dfn> and <dfn>Dag</dfn>. Bragi is mentioned in stanza 18, though it is not there stated that he is Hogni’s son. Dag, who figures largely in stanzas 28⁠–⁠34, is a puzzle, for the verse never names him, and it is an open question where the annotator got his name. <dfn>Frekastein</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar</i>, 39 and note. <dfn>As is written</dfn>: the two lines are quoted, with a change of two words, from <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 33. <dfn>Sinfjotli</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 6 and note, and stanzas 33⁠–⁠48, in which the whole dialogue is given. <dfn>Loyalty</dfn>: apparently the annotator got this bit of information out of stanza 29, in which Sigrun refers to the oaths which her brother had sworn to Helgi. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-685" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-686" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sevafjoll</dfn> (“Wet Mountain”): mentioned only in this poem. <dfn>Giant-steeds</dfn>: wolves, the usual steeds of giantesses; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, 56. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-686" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-687" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Maid</dfn>: the word thus rendered is the same doubtful one which appears in <i xml:lang="non">Völundarkvitha</i>, 1 and 5, and which may mean specifically a Valkyrie (Gering translates it “helmed” or “heroic”) or simply “wise.” <abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Völundarkvitha</i>, note on introductory prose. <dfn>Norns</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 20 and note. In stanza 33 Dag similarly lays the blame for the murder he has committed on Othin. <dfn>Bragi</dfn>: probably Sigrun’s brother. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-687" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-688" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza looks like an interpolation, and there is little or nothing to connect it with the slaying of Granmar’s sons. In the manuscript line 2, indicated as the beginning of a stanza, precedes line 1. <dfn>Hlebjorg</dfn> (“Sea-Mountain”) and <dfn>Styrkleifar</dfn> (“Battle-Cliffs”): place names not elsewhere mentioned. Of <dfn>Hrollaug’s sons</dfn> nothing further is known. <dfn>Starkath</dfn>: this name gives a hint of the origin of this stanza, for Saxo Grammaticus tells of the slaying of the Swedish hero Starkath (“The Strong”) the son of Storverk, and describes how his severed head bit the ground in anger (<abbr>cf.</abbr> line 4). In all probability this stanza is from an entirely different poem, dealing with the Starkath story, and the annotator’s attempt to identify the Swedish hero as a third son of Granmar is quite without foundation. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-688" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-689" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The difference of meter would of itself be enough to indicate that this stanza comes from an entirely different poem. A few editions assign the whole stanza to Helgi, but lines 3⁠–⁠4 are almost certainly Sigrun’s, and the manuscript begins line 3 with a large capital letter following a period. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-689" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-690" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With this stanza begins the dispute between Gothmund and Sinfjotli which, together with Helgi’s rebuke to his half-brother, appears at much greater length in <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, 33⁠–⁠48. It is introduced here manifestly in the wrong place. The version here given is almost certainly the older of the two, but the resemblance is so striking, and in some cases (notably in Helgi’s rebuke) the stanzas are so nearly identical, that it seems probable that the composer of the first Helgi Hundingsbane lay borrowed directly from the poem of which the present dialogue is a fragment. <dfn>Flag</dfn>: the banner (“gunnfani,” <abbr>cf.</abbr> “gonfalon”) here serves as the signal for war instead of the red shield mentioned in <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, 34. <dfn>Battle-light</dfn>: perhaps the “northern lights.” <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-690" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-691" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 3⁠–⁠4 are obscure, and in the manuscript show signs of error. Helgi had not at this time, so far as we know, conquered any of Hothbrodd’s land. <dfn>The realm of the fishes</dfn>, in line 4, presumably means the sea, but the word here translated “fishes” is obscure, and many editors treat it as a proper name, “the realm of the Fjorsungs,” but without further suggestion as to who or what the Fjorsungs are. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-691" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-692" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The word here translated <dfn>swords</dfn> is a conjectural emendation; the manuscript implies merely an invitation to continue the quarrel at Frekastein. <dfn>Hothbrodd</dfn>: apparently he is here considered as present during the dispute; some editors, in defiance of the meter, have emended the line to mean</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Time is it for Hothbrodd</span>
								<span>vengeance to have.” <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-692" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-693" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, 47⁠–⁠48, which are nearly identical. Stanza 27 in the manuscript is abbreviated to the first letters of the words, except for line 5, which does not appear in the other poem, and which looks like an interpolation. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-693" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-694" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here begins a new section of the poem, dealing with Helgi’s death at the hands of <dfn>Dag</dfn>, Sigrun’s brother. The note is based wholly on stanzas 28⁠–⁠34, except for the introduction of Dag’s name (<abbr>cf.</abbr> note on prose following stanza 16), and the reference to <dfn>Othin’s spear</dfn>, the weapon which made victory certain, and which the annotator brought in doubtless on the strength of Dag’s statement that Othin was responsible for Helgi’s death (stanza 33). <dfn>Fjoturlund</dfn> (“Fetter-Wood”): mentioned only here and in stanza 28. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-694" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-695" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 5 looks like an interpolation. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-695" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-696" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Leipt</dfn>: this river is mentioned in <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 28. <dfn>Uth</dfn>: a daughter of the sea-god Ægir; regarding her sacred stone we know nothing. According to the annotator, Dag’s life had been spared because he swore loyalty to Helgi. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-696" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-697" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap indicated in the manuscript, but most editors have assumed that either the first or the last two lines have been lost. Bugge adds a line:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“The shield shall not help thee</span>
								<span>which thou holdest.” <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-697" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-698" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Vandilsve</dfn> (“Vandil’s Shrine”): who Vandil was we do not know; this and Vigdalir (“Battle-Dale”) are purely mythical places. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-698" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-699" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 5 may be spurious. <dfn>Vigblær</dfn> (“Battle-Breather”): Helgi’s horse. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-699" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-700" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 5 (or possibly line 4) may be spurious. <abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 17, and <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, 2. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-700" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-701" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Valhall</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: there is no indication as to where the annotator got this notion of Helgi’s sharing Othin’s rule. It is most unlikely that such an idea ever found place in any of the Helgi poems, or at least in the earlier ones; probably it was a late development of the tradition in a period when Othin was no longer taken seriously. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-701" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-702" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza apparently comes from an otherwise lost passage containing a contest of words between Helgi and Hunding; indeed the name of Hunding may have been substituted for another one beginning with “H,” and the stanza originally have had no connection with Helgi at all. The annotator inserts it here through an obvious misunderstanding, taking it to be Helgi’s application of the power conferred on him by Othin. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-702" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-703" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here begins the final section (stanzas 39⁠–⁠50), wherein Sigrun visits the dead Helgi in his burial hill. <dfn>Doom of the gods</dfn>: the phrase “ragna rök” has been rather unfortunately Anglicized into the word “ragnarok” (the Norse term is not a proper name), and <i xml:lang="non">rök</i>, “doom,” has been confused with <i xml:lang="non">rökkr</i>, “darkness,” and so translated “dusk of the Gods,” or “<span xml:lang="de">Götterdämmerung</span>.” <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-703" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-704" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript most of this stanza is abbreviated to the first letters of the words. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-704" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-705" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 3 (or possibly line 2) may be spurious. <dfn>Sword-tracks</dfn>: wounds. One edition places stanza 48 after stanza 41, and another does the same with stanza 50. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-705" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-706" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Possibly lines 5⁠–⁠6 are spurious, or part of a stanza the rest of which has been lost. It has also been suggested that two lines may have been lost after line 2, making a new stanza of lines 3⁠–⁠6. <dfn>Kinsman</dfn>: literally “son-in-law.” <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-706" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-707" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 4 and 6 have been marked by various editors as probably spurious. Others regard lines 1⁠–⁠2 as the beginning of a stanza the rest of which has been lost, or combine lines 5⁠–⁠6 with lines 5⁠–⁠6 of stanza 45 to make a new stanza. <dfn>South-maid</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 17 and note. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-707" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-708" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Both lines 3⁠–⁠4 and lines 5⁠–⁠6 have been suspected by editors of being interpolated, and the loss of two lines has also been suggested. <dfn>Brides</dfn>: the plural here is perplexing. Gering insists that only Sigrun is meant, and translates the word as singular, but both “brides” and “loves” are uncompromisingly plural in the text. Were the men of Helgi’s ghostly following likewise visited by their wives? The annotator may have thought so, for in the prose he mentions the “women” returning to the house, although, of course, this may refer simply to Sigrun and the maid. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-708" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-709" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 5 (or possibly line 4) may be interpolated. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-709" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-710" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Wind-helm</dfn>: the sky; the bridge is Bifrost, the rainbow (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 29). <dfn>Salgofnir</dfn> (“Hall-Crower”): the cock Gollinkambi who awakes the gods and warriors for the last battle. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-710" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-711" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many editors assign this speech to the maid. Line 5 (or 4) may be spurious. <dfn>Meeting of dreams</dfn> (“Dream-Thing”): sleep. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-711" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-712" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The attitude of the annotator is clearly revealed by his contempt for those who put any faith in such “old wives’ folly” as the idea that men and women could be reborn. As in the case of Helgi Hjorvarthsson, the theory of the hero’s rebirth seems to have developed in order to unite around a single Helgi the various stories in which the hero is slain. The “Lay of Kara” (<i xml:lang="non">Karuljoth</i>) is lost, although, as has been pointed out, parts of the <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i> may be remnants of it, but we find the main outlines of the story in the <i xml:lang="non">Hromundar saga Greipssonar</i>, whose compilers appear to have known the <i xml:lang="non">Karuljoth</i>. In the saga Helgi Haddingjaskati (Helgi the Haddings’-Hero) is protected by the Valkyrie Kara, who flies over him in the form of a swan (note once more the Valkyrie swan-maiden confusion); but in his fight with Hromund he swings his sword so high that he accidentally gives Kara a mortal wound, whereupon Hromund cuts off his head. As this makes the third recorded death of Helgi (once at the hands of Alf, once at those of Dag, and finally in the fight with Hromund), the phenomenon of his rebirth is not surprising. The points of resemblance in all the Helgi stories, including the one told in the lost <i xml:lang="non">Karuljoth</i>, are sufficiently striking so that it is impossible not to see in them a common origin, and not to believe that Helgi the son of Hjorvarth, Helgi the son of Sigmund and Helgi the Haddings’-Hero (not to mention various other Helgis who probably figured in songs and stories now lost) were all originally the same Helgi who appears in the early traditions of Denmark. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-712" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Fra Dautha Sinfjotla -->
				<li id="note-713" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Regarding <dfn>Sigmund</dfn>, <dfn>Sinfjotli</dfn>, and <dfn>Volsung</dfn> see Introductory Note. <dfn>The Franks</dfn>: although the Sigurth story had reached the North as early as the sixth or seventh century, it never lost all the marks of its Frankish origin. <dfn>Helgi</dfn> and <dfn>Hamund</dfn>: sons of Sigmund and Borghild; Helgi is, of course Helgi Hundingsbane; of Hamund nothing further is recorded. <dfn>Borghild</dfn>: the manuscript leaves a blank for the name of her brother; evidently the compiler hoped some day to discover it and write it in, but never did. A few editions insert wholly unauthorized names from late paper manuscripts, such as Hroar, Gunnar, or Borgar. In the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> Borghild bids Sinfjotli drink “if he has the courage of a Volsung.” Sigmund gives his advice because “the king was very drunk, and that was why he spoke thus.” Gering, on the other hand, gives Sigmund credit for having believed that the draught would deposit its poisonous contents in Sinfjotli’s beard, and thus do him no harm. <dfn>Boat</dfn>: the man who thus carries off the dead Sinfjotli in his boat is presumably Othin. <dfn>Denmark</dfn>: Borghild belongs to the Danish Helgi part of the story. <dfn>The Franks</dfn>: with this the Danish and Norse stories of Helgi and Sinfjotli come to an end, and the Frankish story of Sigurth begins. Sigmund’s two kingdoms are an echo of the blended traditions. <dfn>Hjordis</dfn>: just where this name came from is not clear, for in the German story Siegfried’s mother is Sigelint, but the name of the father of Hjordis, <dfn>Eylimi</dfn>, gives a clue, for Eylimi is the father of Svava, wife of Helgi Hjorvarthsson. Doubtless the two men are not identical, but it seems likely that both Eylimi and Hjordis were introduced into the Sigmund-Sigurth story, the latter replacing Sigelint, from some version of the Helgi tradition. <dfn>Hunding</dfn>: in the Helgi lays the sons of Hunding are all killed, but they reappear here and in two of the poems (<i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 9, and <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i>, 15), and the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> names Lyngvi as the son of Hunding who, as the rejected lover of Hjordis, kills Sigmund and his father-in-law, Eylimi, as well. The episode of Hunding and his sons belongs entirely to the Danish (Helgi) part of the story; the German legend knows nothing of it, and permits the elderly Sigmund to outlive his son. There was doubtless a poem on this battle, for the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> quotes two lines spoken by the dying Sigmund to Hjordis before he tells her to give the pieces of his broken sword to their unborn son. <dfn>Alf</dfn>: after the battle, according to the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>, Lyngvi Hundingsson tried to capture Hjordis, but she was rescued by the sea-rover Alf, son of King Hjalprek of Denmark, who subsequently married her. Here is another trace of the Danish Helgi tradition. The <i xml:lang="non">Nornageststhattr</i> briefly tells the same story. <a href="fra-dautha-sinfjotla.xhtml#noteref-713" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Gripisspo -->
				<li id="note-714" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript gives the poem no title. <dfn>Gripir</dfn>: this uncle of Sigurth’s was probably a pure invention of the poet’s. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> mentions him, but presumably only because of his appearance here. On <dfn>Eylimi</dfn> and <dfn>Hjordis</dfn> see <i xml:lang="non">Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i> and note. <dfn>Geitir</dfn>, the serving-man, is likewise apparently an invention of the poet’s. <a href="helgakvitha-hundingsbana-2.xhtml#noteref-714" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-715" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speakers anywhere in the poem. Some editors have made separate stanzas out of the two-line speeches in stanzas 1, 3 and 6. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-715" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-716" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sigurth</dfn>: a few editions use in the verse the older form of this name, “Sigvorth,” though the manuscript here keeps to the form used in this translation. The Old High German “Sigifrid” (“Peace-Bringer through Victory”) became the Norse “Sigvorth” (“Victory-Guarder”), this, in turn, becoming “Sigurth.” <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-716" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-717" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bugge thinks a stanza has been lost after stanza 4, in which Geitir tells Gripir who Sigurth is. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-717" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-718" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Grani</dfn>: Sigurth’s horse. According to the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> his father was Sleipnir, Othin’s eight-legged horse, and Othin himself gave him to Sigurth. The introductory note to the <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i> tells a different story. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-718" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-719" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Thy father</dfn>: on the death of Sigmund and <dfn>Eylimi</dfn> at the hands of <dfn>Hunting’s sons</dfn> see <i xml:lang="non">Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i> and note. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-719" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-720" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The dragon</dfn>: <dfn>Fafnir</dfn>, brother of the dwarf Regin, who turns himself into a dragon to guard Andvari’s hoard; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i> and <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>. <dfn>Gnitaheith</dfn>: a relic of the German tradition; it has been identified as lying south of Paderborn. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-720" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-721" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gjuki</dfn>: the Norse form of the name Gibeche (“The Giver”). Gjuki is the father of Gunnar, Hogni, and Guthrun, the family which reflects most directly the Burgundian part of the tradition (<abbr>cf.</abbr> Introductory Note). The statement that Sigurth is to go direct from the slaying of Fafnir to Gjuki’s hall involves one of the confusions resulting from the dual personality of Brynhild. In the older (and the original South Germanic) story, Sigurth becomes a guest of the Gjukungs before he has ever heard of Brynhild, and first sees her when, having changed forms with Gunnar, he goes to woo her for the latter. In another version he finds Brynhild before he visits the Gjukungs, only to forget her as the result of the magic draught administered by Guthrun’s mother. Both these versions are represented in the poems of which the author of the <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i> made use, and he tried, rather clumsily, to combine them, by having Sigurth go to Gjuki’s house, then find the unnamed Valkyrie, and then return to Gjuki, the false wooing following this second visit. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-721" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-722" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Basing his story on the <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i>, the poet here tells of Sigurth’s finding of the Valkyrie, whom he does not identify with Brynhild, daughter of Buthli (stanza 27), at all. His error in this respect is not surprising, in view of Brynhild’s dual identity (<abbr>cf.</abbr> Introductory Note, and <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>, 44 and note). <dfn>Helgi</dfn>: according to <i xml:lang="non">Helreith Brynhildar</i> (stanza 8), with which the author of the <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i> was almost certainly familiar, the hero for whose death Brynhild was punished was named Hjalmgunnar. Is Helgi here identical with Hjalmgunnar, or did the author make a mistake? Finnur Jonsson thinks the author regarded Sigurth’s Valkyrie as a fourth incarnation of Svava-Sigrun-Kara, and wrote Helgi’s name in deliberately. Many editors, following Bugge, have tried to reconstruct line 2 so as to get rid of Helgi’s name. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-722" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-723" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Heimir</dfn>: the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> says that Heimir was the husband of Brynhild’s sister, Bekkhild. Brynhild’s family connections involve a queer mixture of northern and southern legend. Heimir and Bekkhild are purely of northern invention; neither of them is mentioned in any of the earlier poems, though Brynhild speaks of her “foster-father” in <i xml:lang="non">Helreith Brynhildar</i>. In the older Norse poems Brynhild is a sister of Atli (Attila), a relationship wholly foreign to the southern stories, and the father of this strangely assorted pair is Buthli, who in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="de">Nibelungenlied</i> is apparently Etzel’s grandfather. Add to this her role of Valkyrie, and it is small wonder that the annotator himself was puzzled. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-723" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-724" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Brynhild</dfn> (“Armed Warrior”): on her and her family see Introductory Note and note to stanza 19. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-724" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-725" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Most editions have no comma after line 3, and change the meaning to</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Fain of thee</span>
								<span>the fair-haired one</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For her daughter is.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><dfn>Grimhild</dfn>: in the northern form of the story Kriemhild, Gunther’s sister and Siegfried’s wife, becomes Grimhild, mother of Gunnar and Guthrun, the latter taking Kriemhild’s place. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> tells how Grimhild gave Sigurth a magic draught which made him utterly forget Brynhild. Edzardi thinks two stanzas have been lost after stanza 33, their remains appearing in stanza 37. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-725" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-726" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> Grimhild merely advises Gunnar to seek Brynhild for his wife, and to have Sigurth ride with him. <dfn>Goths</dfn>: the historical Gunnar (Gundicarius, <abbr>cf.</abbr> Introductory Note) was not a Goth, but a Burgundian, but the word “Goth” was applied in the North without much discrimination to the southern Germanic peoples. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-726" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-727" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="de">Nibelungenlied</i> Siegfried merely makes himself invisible in order to lend Gunther his strength for the feats which must be performed in order to win the redoubtable bride. In the northern version Sigurth and Gunnar change forms, “as Grimhild had taught them how to do.” The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> tells how Sigurth and Gunnar came to Heimir, who told them that to win Brynhild one must ride through the ring of fire which surrounded her hall (<abbr>cf.</abbr> the hall of Mengloth in <i xml:lang="non">Svipdagsmol</i>). Gunnar tries it, but his horse balks; then he mounts Grani, but Grani will not stir for him. So they change forms, and Sigurth rides Grani through the flames. <dfn>Oaths</dfn>: the blood-brotherhood sworn by Sigurth, Gunnar, and Hogni makes it impossible for the brothers to kill him themselves, but they finally get around the difficulty by inducing their half-brother, Gotthorm (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hyndluljoth</i>, 27 and note) to do it. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-727" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-728" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The last half of line 4 is obscure, and the reading is conjectural. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-728" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-729" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Something is clearly wrong with stanzas 41⁠–⁠43. In the manuscript the order is 41, 43, 42, which brings two of Gripir’s answers together, followed by two of Sigurth’s questions. Some editors have arranged the stanzas as in this translation, while others have interchanged 41 and 43. In any case, Sigurth in stanza 42 asks about the “three nights” which Gripir has never mentioned. I suspect that lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 41, which are practically identical with lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 23, got in here by mistake, replacing two lines which may have run thus:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“With thy sword between,</span>
								<span>three nights thou sleepest</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>With her thou winnest</span>
								<span>for Gunnar’s wife.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The subsequent poems tell how Sigurth laid his sword Gram between himself and Brynhild. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-729" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-730" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The simultaneous weddings of Sigurth and Gunnar form a memorable feature of the German tradition as it appears in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="de">Nibelungenlied</i>, but in the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> Sigurth marries Guthrun before he sets off with Gunnar to win Brynhild. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-730" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-731" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>, Sigurth remembers his oaths to Brynhild almost immediately after his return to Gunnar’s house. Brynhild, on the other hand, knows nothing until the famous quarrel between herself and Guthrun at the bath (another reminiscence of the German story), when she taunts Guthrun with Sigurth’s inferiority to Gunnar, and Guthrun retorts with the statement that it was Sigurth, and not Gunnar, who rode through the flames. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-731" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-732" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brynhild tells Gunnar that Sigurth really possessed her during the three nights when he slept by her in Gunnar’s form, thus violating his oath. Here again there is a confusion of two traditions. If Sigurth did not meet Brynhild until after his oath to Gunnar (<abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 13), Brynhild’s charge is entirely false, as she herself admits in <i xml:lang="non">Helreith Brynhildar</i>. On the other hand, according to the version in which Sigurth finds Brynhild before he meets Gjuki’s sons, their union was not only completed, but she had by him a daughter, Aslaug, whom she leaves in Heimir’s charge before going to become Gunnar’s wife. This is the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> version, and thus the statement Brynhild makes to Gunnar, as a result of which Sigurth is slain, is quite true. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-732" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-733" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gotthorm</dfn>: Gunnar’s half-brother, and slayer of Sigurth. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-733" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-734" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript has stanzas 52 and 53 in inverse order. <a href="gripisspo.xhtml#noteref-734" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Reginsmol -->
				<li id="note-735" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hjalprek</dfn>: father of Alf, Sigurth’s stepfather; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i>, and note. <dfn>Grani</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 5 and note. <dfn>Regin</dfn> (“Counsel-Giver”): undoubtedly he goes back to the smith of the German story; in the <i xml:lang="non">Thithrekssaga</i> version he is called Mimir, while Regin is there the name of the dragon (here Regin’s brother, Fafnir). The <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i> (stanza 12) names a Regin among the dwarfs, and the name may have assisted in making Regin a dwarf here. <dfn>Hreithmar</dfn>: nothing is known of him outside of this story. <dfn>Othin</dfn>, <dfn>Hönir</dfn> and <dfn>Loki</dfn>: these same three gods appear in company in <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 17⁠–⁠18. <dfn>Andvari’s fall</dfn>: according to Snorri, who tells this entire story in the <i xml:lang="non">Skaldskaparmal</i>, Andvari’s fall was in the world of the dark elves, while the one where Loki killed the otter was not; here, however, the two are considered identical. <dfn>With his eyes shut</dfn>: according to Snorri, Otr ate with his eyes shut because he was so greedy that he could not bear to see the food before him diminishing. <dfn>Ron</dfn>: wife of the sea-god Ægir, who draws down drowning men with her net; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar</i>, 18 and note. Snorri says that Loki caught the pike with his hands. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-735" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-736" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri quotes this stanza. <dfn>Water’s flame</dfn>: gold, so called because Ægir, the sea-god, was wont to light his hall with gold. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-736" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-737" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri quotes this stanza. The name of the speaker is not given in the manuscripts. <dfn>Oin</dfn>: nothing further is known of Andvari’s father. <dfn>Norn</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 20. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-737" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-738" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanzas 3⁠–⁠4 may well be fragments of some other poem. Certainly Loki’s question does not fit the situation, and the passage looks like an extract from some such poem as <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>. In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> the phrase “Loki spake” stands in the middle of line 1. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-738" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-739" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name the speaker. <dfn>Vathgelmir</dfn> (“Raging to Wade”): a river not elsewhere mentioned, but <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 39. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-739" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-740" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri says Andvari’s ring had the power to create new gold. In this it resembled Baldr’s ring, Draupnir; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Skirnismol</i>, 21 and note. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-740" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-741" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza apparently comes from a different source from stanzas 1⁠–⁠4 (or 1⁠–⁠2 if 3⁠–⁠4 are interpolated) and 6⁠–⁠10; <abbr>cf.</abbr> Introductory Note. In the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> Andvari lays his curse particularly on the ring. <dfn>Gust</dfn>: possibly a name for Andvari himself, or for an earlier possessor of the treasure. <dfn>Brothers twain</dfn>: Fafnir and Regin. <dfn>Heroes eight</dfn>: the word “eight” may easily have been substituted for something like “all” to make the stanza fit the case; the “eight” in question are presumably Sigurth, Gotthorm, Gunnar, Hogni, Atli, Erp, Sorli and Hamther, all of whom are slain in the course of the story. But the stanza may originally not have referred to Andvari’s treasure at all. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-741" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-742" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Andvaranaut</dfn>: “Andvari’s Gem.” <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-742" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-743" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri quotes this stanza, introducing it, as here, with “Then Loki said” in the prose. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> omits this phrase, but inserts “said Loki” in line 1. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-743" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-744" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The word translated “maid” in line 2 is obscure, and “gold” may be meant. Apparently, however, the reference is to the fight between Sigurth and the sons of Gjuki over Brynhild. The manuscript does not name the speaker, and many editions assign this stanza to Hreithmar. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-744" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-745" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript includes “said Hreithmar” (abbreviated) in the middle of line 1, and some editors have followed this. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-745" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-746" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hreithmar’s daughters do not appear elsewhere. It has been suggested that originally stanza 10 was followed by one in which Lofnheith lamented her inability to avenge her father, as she was married and had no son. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-746" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-747" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apparently an interpolation (<abbr>cf.</abbr> Introductory Note). Vigfusson tries to reconstruct lines 2 and 4 to fit the Ljothahattr rhythm, but without much success. Hreithmar urges his daughter, as she has no sons, to bear a daughter who, in turn, will have a son to avenge his great-grandfather. Grundtvig worked out an ingenious theory to fit this stanza, making Sigurth’s grandfather, Eylimi, the husband of Lyngheith’s daughter, but there is absolutely no evidence to support this. The stanza may have nothing to do with Hreithmar. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-747" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-748" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This and the following stanza may be out of place here, really belonging, together with their introductory prose sentence, in the opening prose passage, following the first sentence describing Regin. Certainly they seem to relate to Regin’s first meeting with Sigurth. Stanzas 13⁠–⁠26, interspersed with prose, are quoted in the <i xml:lang="non">Nornageststhattr</i>. Stanzas 13⁠–⁠18 may be the remnants of a lost poem belonging to the Helgi cycle (<abbr>cf.</abbr> Introductory Note). <dfn>Hardy wolf</dfn>: warrior, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Sigurth. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-748" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-749" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Yngvi’s heir</dfn>: Yngvi was one of the sons of the Danish king Halfdan the Old, and traditionally an ancestor of Helgi (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 57 and note). Calling Sigurth a descendant of Yngvi is, of course, absurd, and the use of this phrase is one of the many reasons for believing that stanzas 13⁠–⁠18 belonged originally to the Helgi cycle. <dfn>The threads</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: another link with Helgi; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 3⁠–⁠4. As Helgi was likewise regarded as a son of Sigmund, stanzas 13⁠–⁠14 would fit him just as well as Sigurth. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-749" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-750" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gnitaheith</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 11 and note. <dfn>Fear-helm</dfn>: the word “ægis-hjalmr,” which occurs both here and in <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>, suggests an extraordinarily interesting, and still disputed, question of etymology. <dfn>Gram</dfn>: according to the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> Regin forged this sword from the fragments of the sword given by Othin to Sigmund (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i> and note). <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-750" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-751" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Regarding the <dfn>sons of Hunding</dfn> and <dfn>Eylimi</dfn>, father of Sigurth’s mother, all of whom belong to the Helgi tradition, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i> and note. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-751" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-752" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fleet, and the subsequent storm, are also reminiscent of the Helgi cycle; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 29⁠–⁠31, and <i>II</i>, prose after stanza 16. <dfn>A man</dfn>: Othin. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-752" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-753" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Rævil’s steeds</dfn> (Rævil was a sea-king, possibly the grandson of Ragnar Lothbrok mentioned in the <i xml:lang="non">Hervararsaga</i>), <dfn>sail-horses</dfn> and <dfn>sea-steeds</dfn> all mean “ships.” <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-753" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-754" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sea-trees</dfn> and <dfn>roller-steeds</dfn> (the latter because ships were pulled up on shore by means of rollers) both mean “ships.” <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-754" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-755" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> quotes this stanza. <dfn>Hnikar</dfn> and <dfn>Fjolnir</dfn>: Othin gives himself both these names in <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 47; <dfn>Feng</dfn> (“The Seizer”) does not appear elsewhere. According to the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>, no one knew Othin’s name when he came to Volsung’s house and left the sword there for Sigmund. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-755" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-756" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This and the following stanzas are strongly suggestive of the <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, and probably came originally from some such collection. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-756" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-757" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza is clearly an interpolation, drawn in by the commonsense advice, as distinct from omens, given in the last lines of stanza 22. <dfn>Moon’s sister</dfn>: the sun; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 23 and note. <dfn>Wedge-like</dfn>: the wedge formation (prescribed anew in 1920 for the United States Army under certain circumstances) was said to have been invented by Othin himself, and taught by him only to the most favored warriors. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-757" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-758" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Goddesses</dfn>: Norse mythology included an almost limitless number of minor deities, the female ones, both kind and unkind, being generally classed among the lesser Norns. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-758" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-759" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza almost certainly had nothing originally to do with the others in this passage; it may have been taken from a longer version of the <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i> itself. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-759" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-760" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Lyngvi</dfn>: the son of Hunding who killed Sigmund in jealousy of his marriage with Hjordis; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i> and note. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> names one brother who was with Lyngvi in the battle, Hjorvarth, and Sigurth kills him as readily as if he had not already been killed long before by Helgi. But, as has been seen, it was nothing for a man to be killed in two or three different ways. <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-760" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-761" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Bloody eagle</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: the <i xml:lang="non">Nornageststhattr</i> describes the manner in which the captured Lyngvi was put to death. “Regin advised that they should carve the bloody eagle on his back. So Regin took his sword and cleft Lyngvi’s back so that he severed his back from his ribs, and then drew out his lungs. So died Lyngvi with great courage.” <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-761" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-762" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> there is no break of any kind between this prose passage and the prose introduction to the <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i> (<abbr>cf.</abbr> Introductory Note). <a href="reginsmol.xhtml#noteref-762" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Fafnismol -->
				<li id="note-763" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The prose follows the concluding prose passage of the <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i> without any interruption; the heading “Of Fafnir’s Death” is written in the manuscript very faintly just before stanza 1. <dfn>Gnitaheith</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 11 and note. <dfn>Fafnir</dfn>: Regin’s brother: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i>, prose after stanza 14. <dfn>Venom</dfn>: in the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> it was the blood, and not the venom, that poured down on Sigurth’s head. Sigurth was much worried about this danger, and before he dug the trench asked Regin what would happen if the dragon’s blood overcame him. Regin thereupon taunted him with cowardice (Sigurth refers to this taunt in stanza 30, but the stanza embodying it has disappeared). After Sigurth had dug his trench, an old man (Othin, of course) appeared and advised him to dig other trenches to carry off the blood, which he did, thereby escaping harm. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-763" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-764" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first line in the original, as here, is unusually long, but dramatically very effective on that account. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-764" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-765" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The names of the speakers do not appear in the manuscript, though they seem originally to have been indicated in the margin for stanzas 3⁠–⁠30. The last two lines of stanza 3 are missing in the manuscript, with no gap indicated, but the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> prose paraphrase indicates that something was omitted, and the lines here given are conjecturally reconstructed from this paraphrase. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-765" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-766" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-766" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-767" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 4, utterly obscure in the manuscript, is guesswork. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-767" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-768" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fafnir here refers to the fact that Hjordis, mother of the still unborn Sigurth, was captured by Alf after Sigmund’s death; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i>, note. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-768" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-769" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanzas 11⁠–⁠15 are probably interpolated, and come from a poem similar to <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>. <dfn>The headland</dfn>: Fafnir is apparently quoting proverbs; this one seems to mean that disaster (“the fate of the Norns”) awaits when one rounds the first headland (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, at the beginning of life’s voyage, in youth). The third line is a commentary on obstinate rashness. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrases stanzas 11⁠–⁠15 throughout. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-769" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-770" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Norns</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 13 and note. Sigurth has no possible interest in knowing what Norns are helpful in childbirth, but interpolations were seldom logical. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-770" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-771" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorri quotes this stanza. There were minor Norns, or fates, in addition to the three great Norns, regarding whom <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 20. <dfn>Dvalin</dfn>: chief of the dwarfs; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 14. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-771" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-772" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Surt</dfn>: ruler of the fire world; the reference is to the last great battle. <dfn>Sword-sweat</dfn>: blood. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-772" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-773" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Oskopnir</dfn> (“Not-Made”): apparently another name for Vigrith, which is named in <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>, 18, as the final battleground. <dfn>Bilrost</dfn> (or Bifrost): the rainbow bridge which breaks beneath Surt’s followers; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 29 and note. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-773" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-774" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With this stanza Fafnir returns to the situation. <dfn>Fear-helm</dfn>: regarding the “ægis-hjalmr” <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i>, prose after stanza 14 and note. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-774" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-775" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 3⁠–⁠4 do not appear in the manuscript, and no gap is indicated; they are here conjecturally paraphrased from the prose passage in the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-775" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-776" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It has been suggested that this stanza is spurious, and that stanza 21 ought to follow stanza 22. Lines 3⁠–⁠4, abbreviated in the manuscript, are identical with lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 9. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase in place of these two lines makes Fafnir say: “For it often happens that he who gets a deadly wound yet avenges himself.” It is quite likely that two stanzas have been lost. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-776" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-777" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> places its paraphrase of this stanza between those of stanzas 15 and 16. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-777" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-778" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 2 is probably spurious, but it is a phrase typical of such poems as <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i> or <i xml:lang="non">Vafthruthnismol</i>. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-778" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-779" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gram</dfn>: Sigurth’s sword; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i>, prose after 14. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-779" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-780" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript stanzas 26⁠–⁠29 stand after stanza 31, which fails to make clear sense; they are here rearranged in accordance with the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-780" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-781" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Almost certainly interpolated from some such poem as the <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>. Even the faithful <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> fails to paraphrase stanza 29. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-781" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-782" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Something has evidently been lost before this stanza. Sigurth clearly refers to Regin’s reproach when he was digging the trench (<abbr>cf.</abbr> note on introductory prose), but the poem does not give such a passage. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-782" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-783" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Rithil</dfn> (“Swift-Moving”): Snorri calls the sword Refil (“Serpent”). <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-783" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-784" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That the birds’ stanzas come from more than one source is fairly apparent, but whether from two or from three or more is uncertain. It is also far from clear how many birds are speaking. The manuscript numbers <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> in the margin with numerals; the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> makes a different bird speak each time. There are almost as many guesses as there are editions. I suspect that in the original poem there was one bird, speaking stanzas 34 and 37. Stanza 38 is little more than a repetition of stanza 34, and may well have been a later addition. As for the stanzas in Fornyrthislag (32⁠–⁠33 and 35⁠–⁠36), they apparently come from another poem, in which several birds speak (<abbr>cf.</abbr> “we sisters” in stanza 35). This may be the same poem from which stanzas 40⁠–⁠44 were taken, as well as some of the Fornyrthislag stanzas in the <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i>. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-784" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-785" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions turn this speech from the third person into the second, but the manuscript is clear enough. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-785" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-786" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Wolf</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: the phrase is nearly equivalent to “there must be fire where there is smoke.” The proverb appears elsewhere in Old Norse. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-786" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-787" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Tree of battle</dfn>: warrior. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-787" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-788" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here, as in stanza 34, some editions turn the speech from the third person into the second. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-788" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-789" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Giant</dfn>: Regin was certainly not a frost-giant, and the whole stanza looks like some copyist’s blundering reproduction of stanza 34. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-789" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-790" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Neither the manuscript nor any of the editions suggest the existence of more than one bird in stanzas 40⁠–⁠44. It seems to me, however, that there are not only two birds, but two distinct stories. Stanzas 40⁠–⁠41 apply solely to Guthrun, and suggest that Sigurth will go straight to Gunnar’s hall. Stanzas 42⁠–⁠44, on the other hand, apply solely to Brynhild, and indicate that Sigurth will find her before he visits the Gjukungs. The confusion which existed between these two versions of the story, and which involved a fundamental difference in the final working out of Brynhild’s revenge, is commented on in the note on <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 13. In the present passage it is possible that two birds are speaking, each reflecting one version of the story; it seems even more likely that one speech or the other (40⁠–⁠41 or 42⁠–⁠44) reflects the original form of the narrative, the other having been added, either later or from another poem. In the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> the whole passage is condensed into a few words by one bird: “Wiser were it if he should then ride up on Hindarfjoll, where Brynhild sleeps, and there would he get much wisdom.” The Guthrun-bird does not appear at all. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-790" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-791" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gjuki</dfn>: father of Gunnar and Guthrun: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 13 and note. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-791" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-792" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hindarfjoll</dfn>: “Mountain of the Hind.” <dfn>Light of the flood</dfn>: gold; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i>, 1 and note. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-792" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-793" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Battle-maid</dfn>: Brynhild, here clearly defined as a Valkyrie. <dfn>Bane of the wood</dfn>: fire. <dfn>Ygg</dfn>: Othin; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 53. <dfn>The thorn</dfn>: a prose note in <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i> calls it “sleep-thorn.” <dfn>The fighter</dfn>: the story of the reason for Brynhild’s punishment is told in the prose following stanza 4 of <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i>. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-793" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-794" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Vingskornir</dfn>: Brynhild’s horse, not elsewhere mentioned. <dfn>Victory-bringer</dfn>: the word thus translated is in the original “sigrdrifa.” The compiler of the collection, not being familiar with this word, assumed that it was a proper name, and in the prose following stanza 4 of the <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i> he specifically states that this was the Valkyrie’s name. Editors, until recently, have followed him in this error, failing to recognize that “sigrdrifa” was simply an epithet for Brynhild. It is from this blunder that the so-called <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i> takes its name. Brynhild’s dual personality as a Valkyrie and as the daughter of Buthli has made plenty of trouble, but the addition of a second Valkyrie in the person of the supposed “Sigrdrifa” has made still more. <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-794" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-795" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is no break in the manuscript between the end of this prose passage and the beginning of the one introducing the <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i>: some editors include the entire prose passage with one poem or the other. <dfn>Hrotti</dfn>; “Thruster.” <a href="fafnismol.xhtml#noteref-795" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Sigrdrifumol -->
				<li id="note-796" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The introductory prose follows without break the prose concluding the <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>, the point of division being arbitrary and not agreed upon by all editors. <dfn>Hindarfjoll</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>, 42 and note. <dfn>Franks</dfn>: this does not necessarily mean that Sigurth was on his way to the Gjukungs’ home, for Sigmund had a kingdom in the land of the Franks (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i>). <dfn>Shields</dfn>: the annotator probably drew the notion of the shield-tower from the reference in <i xml:lang="non">Helreith Brynhildar</i>, 9. The flame-girt tower was not uncommon; <abbr>cf.</abbr> Mengloth’s hall in <i xml:lang="non">Svipdagsmol</i>. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-796" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-797" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza, and the two lines included in the prose after stanza 4, and possibly stanza 5 as well, evidently come from a different poem from stanzas 2⁠–⁠4. Lines 3⁠–⁠4 in the original are obscure, though the general meaning is clear. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-797" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-798" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript stanza 4 stands before this prose note and stanzas 2⁠–⁠3. The best arrangement of the stanzas seems to be the one here given, following Müllenhoff’s suggestion, but the prose note is out of place anywhere. The first sentence of it ought to follow stanza 4 and immediately precede the next prose note; the second sentence ought to precede stanza 5. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-798" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-799" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sons of day</dfn>: the spirits of light. <dfn>The daughter of night</dfn> (Not), according to Snorri, was Jorth (Earth). <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-799" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-800" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sigrdrifa</dfn>: on the error whereby this epithet, “victory-bringer,” became a proper name <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>, 44 and note. <dfn>Hjalmgunnar</dfn>: in <i xml:lang="non">Helreith Brynhildar</i> (stanza 8) he is called a king of the Goths, which means little; of him and his adversary, <dfn>Agnar</dfn>, we know nothing beyond what is told here. The two lines quoted apparently come from the same poem as stanza 1; the two first lines of the stanza have been reconstructed from the prose thus:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Hjalmgunnar was one,</span>
								<span>the hoary king,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>And triumph to him</span>
								<span>had Heerfather promised.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>A few editions insert in this prose passage stanzas 7⁠–⁠10 of <i xml:lang="non">Helreith Brynhildar</i>, which may or may not have belonged originally to this poem. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-800" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-801" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza is perhaps, but by no means surely, from the same poem as stanza 1. <dfn>Tree of battle</dfn>: warrior. <dfn>Runes</dfn>: the earliest runes were not letters, but simply signs supposed to possess magic power; out of them developed the “runic alphabet.” <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-801" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-802" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanzas 6⁠–⁠12 give a list of runes which probably had no original connection with the Brynhild-Sigurth story. <dfn>Tyr</dfn>: the sword-god (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hymiskvitha</i>, 4 and note); “tyr” is also the name of a rune which became “T.” <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-802" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-803" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> gives only lines 1⁠–⁠6; lines 7⁠–⁠8 are added from <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>. <dfn>Lies</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: a guest on his arrival received a draught of ale from the hands of his host’s wife, and it was to prevent this draught from bewitching him that the runes were recommended. <dfn>Need</dfn>: the word “nauth,” meaning “need,” is also the name of the rune which became “N.” <dfn>Leek</dfn>: leeks were long supposed to have the power of counteracting poison or witchcraft. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-803" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-804" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sail-steeds</dfn>: ships. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-804" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-805" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Branch-runes</dfn>: runes cut in the bark of trees. Such runes were believed to transfer sickness from the invalid to the tree. Some editors, however, have changed “limrunar” (“branch-runes”) to “lifrunar” (“life-runes”). <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-805" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-806" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 3⁠–⁠6 look like an accidental addition, replacing two lines now lost. They mean, apparently, that the man who interweaves his speech with “speech-runes” when he pleads his case at the “Thing,” or popular tribunal, will not unduly enrage his adversary in the argument of the case. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-806" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-807" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here the list of runes breaks off, though the manuscript indicates no gap, and three short passages of a different type, though all dealing with runes, follow. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-807" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-808" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanzas 13⁠–⁠14 appear to have come from a passage regarding Othin’s getting of the runes similar to <i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, 139⁠–⁠146. Editors have tried various combinations of the lines in stanzas 12⁠–⁠14. <dfn>Hropt</dfn>: Othin; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 62. <dfn>The draught</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: apparently the reference is to the head of Mim, from which Othin derived his wisdom in magic (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 47 and note); <dfn>Heithdraupnir</dfn> (“Light-Dropper”) and <dfn>Hoddrofnir</dfn> (“Treasure-Opener”) seem to be names for Mim. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-808" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-809" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza is clearly in bad shape; perhaps, as the manuscript indicates, a new stanza, of which most has been lost, should begin with line 3. <dfn>Brimir</dfn>: a giant (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 9 and 37); why Othin should have his sword is unknown. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-809" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-810" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanzas 15⁠–⁠17 constitute a wholly distinct rune-chant. Line 1 is unusually long in the original, as here. <dfn>Shield</dfn>: the shield Svalin (“Cooling”) that stands in front of the sun; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 38. <dfn>Arvak</dfn> (“Early Walter”) and <dfn>Alsvith</dfn> (“All-Swift”): the horses that draw the sun’s car; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 37. <dfn>Hrungnir</dfn>: the slayer of the giant Hrungnir was Thor (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 14 and note), but the line is in bad shape; the name may not be Hrungnir, and “killer” is a conjectural addition. <dfn>Sleipnir</dfn>: Othin’s eight-legged horse; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 44 and note. <dfn>Sledge</dfn>: perhaps the one mentioned in <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 49. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-810" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-811" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Bragi</dfn>: the god of poetry; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 44 and note. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-811" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-812" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Charms</dfn>: the wearing of amulets was very common. <dfn>Gungnir</dfn>: Othin’s spear, made by the dwarfs, which he occasionally lent to heroes to whom he granted victory. <dfn>Grani</dfn>: Sigurth’s horse; the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> has “giantesses’.” <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-812" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-813" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanzas 18⁠–⁠19, which editors have freely rearranged, apparently come from another source than any of the rest. <dfn>Shaved off</dfn>: the runes were shaved off by Othin from the wood on which they were carved, and the shavings bearing them were put into the magic mead. <dfn>Wanes</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 21, note. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-813" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-814" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 3, 6, and 7 look like spurious additions, but the whole stanza is chaotic. <dfn>Beech-runes</dfn>: runes carved on beech-trees. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-814" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-815" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanzas 20⁠–⁠21 are all that remains of the dialogue between Brynhild and Sigurth from the poem to which stanzas 2⁠–⁠4 belong; <abbr>cf.</abbr> Introductory Note. In the intervening lost stanzas Brynhild has evidently warned Sigurth of the perils that will follow if he swears loyalty to her; hence the choice to which she here refers. <dfn>Tree</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: warrior. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker of either this or the following stanza; the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> names Sigurth before stanza 21. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-815" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-816" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is quite possible that the original poem concluded with two stanzas after this, paraphrased thus in the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>: “Sigurth said: ‘Nowhere is to be found any one wiser than thou, and this I swear, that I shall have thee for mine, and that thou art after my heart’s desire.’ She answered: ‘I would rather have thee though I might choose among all men.’ And this they bound between them with oaths.” Stanzas 22⁠–⁠37, which the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrases, may have been introduced at a relatively early time, but can hardly have formed part of the original poem. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-816" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-817" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With this stanza begins the list of numbered counsels, closely resembling the <i xml:lang="non">Loddfafnismol</i> (<i xml:lang="non">Hovamol</i>, 111⁠–⁠138), here attributed to Brynhild. That the section originally had anything to do with Brynhild is more than improbable. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-817" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-818" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Wolf of his word</dfn>: oath-destroyer, oath-breaker. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-818" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-819" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This chaotic and obscure jumble of lines has been unsuccessfully “improved” by various editors. It is clearly an interpolation, meaning, in substance: “It is dangerous to keep silent too long, as men may think you a coward; but if any one taunts you falsely because of your silence, do not argue with him, but the next morning kill him as proof that he is a liar.” <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-819" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-820" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Probably another interpolation. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-820" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-821" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Silver of kinship</dfn>: the passage is doubtful, but apparently it means the “marriage-price” for which a bride was “bought.” <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-821" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-822" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 1 comes at the end of the thirty-second leaf of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i>, and whatever further was contained in that manuscript has vanished with the lost eight-leaf folio (<abbr>cf.</abbr> Introductory Note). The rest of stanza 29, and stanzas 30⁠–⁠37, are added from later paper manuscripts, which were undoubtedly copied from an old parchment, though probably not from the complete <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i>. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrases these additional stanzas. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-822" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-823" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Probably an interpolation. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-823" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-824" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The meaning is that it is better to go forth to battle than to stay at home and be burned to death. Many a Norse warrior met his death in this latter way; the burning of the house in the <i xml:lang="non">Njalssaga</i> is the most famous instance. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-824" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-825" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Probably an interpolation. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-825" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-826" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 3⁠–⁠4 are probably interpolated. <dfn>Race of wolves</dfn>: family of a slain foe. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-826" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-827" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Probably an interpolation. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-827" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-828" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 3⁠–⁠4 may well have come from the old Sigurth-Brynhild poem, like stanzas 2⁠–⁠4 and 20⁠–⁠21, being inserted here, where they do not fit particularly well, in place of the two lines with which the eleventh counsel originally ended. Perhaps they formed part of the stanza of warning which evidently preceded Brynhild’s speech in stanza 20. In the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> they are paraphrased at the end of Brynhild’s long speech of advice (stanzas 20⁠–⁠37), and are immediately followed by the prose passage given in the note on stanza 21. It seems likely, therefore, that the paper manuscripts have preserved all of the so-called <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i> which was contained in the lost section of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i>, with the possible exception of these two concluding stanzas, and these may very well have been given only in the form of a prose note, though it is practically certain that at one time they existed in verse form. <a href="sigrdrifumol.xhtml#noteref-828" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Brot af Sigurtharkvithu -->
				<li id="note-829" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fragment begins with the last words of line 1 (probably line 3 of the stanza). A few editors ascribe this speech to Gunnar and the next to Brynhild; one reconstruction of lines 1⁠–⁠2 on this probably false assumption runs:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Why art thou, Brynhild,</span>
								<span>daughter of Buthli,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>Scheming ill</span>
								<span>with evil counsel?”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><dfn>Hogni</dfn> (German Hagene): brother of Gunnar and Guthrun. <a href="brot-af-sigurtharkvithu.xhtml#noteref-829" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-830" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A few editors ascribe this speech to Brynhild. Gunnar, if the stanza is his, has believed Brynhild’s statement regarding Sigurth’s disloyalty to his blood-brother. <a href="brot-af-sigurtharkvithu.xhtml#noteref-830" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-831" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> quotes a somewhat different version of this stanza, in which the snake is called “wood-fish” and the third line adds “beer and many things.” Eating snakes and the flesh of beasts of prey was commonly supposed to induce ferocity. <dfn>Gotthorm</dfn>: Grimhild’s son, half-brother to Gunnar. He it is who, not having sworn brotherhood with Sigurth, does the killing. <a href="brot-af-sigurtharkvithu.xhtml#noteref-831" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-832" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript this stanza stands between stanzas 11 and 12; most editions have made the change here indicated. <dfn>South of the Rhine</dfn>: the definite localization of the action shows how clearly all this part of the story was recognized in the North as of German origin. <dfn>Atli</dfn> (Attila; <abbr>cf.</abbr> introductory note to <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>): the Northern version of the story makes him Brynhild’s brother. His marriage with Guthrun, and his slaying of her brothers, are told in the Atli poems. Regarding the manner of Sigurth’s death <abbr>cf.</abbr> concluding prose passage and note. Stanza 13 indicates that after stanza 5 a stanza containing the words of an eagle has been lost. <a href="brot-af-sigurtharkvithu.xhtml#noteref-832" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-833" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>One line of this stanza, but it is not clear which, seems to have been lost. <dfn>The gray horse</dfn>: Grani. <a href="brot-af-sigurtharkvithu.xhtml#noteref-833" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-834" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions set stanzas 8 and 9 after stanza 11; Sijmons marks them as spurious. <dfn>Buthli</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 19, note. <a href="brot-af-sigurtharkvithu.xhtml#noteref-834" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-835" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Goths</dfn>: a generic term for any German race; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 35 and note. <dfn>Five sons</dfn>: according to the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> Sigurth had only one son, named Sigmund, who was killed at Brynhild’s behest. <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i> and <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i> likewise mention only one son. The daughter of Sigurth and Guthrun, Svanhild, marries Jormunrek (Ermanarich). <a href="brot-af-sigurtharkvithu.xhtml#noteref-835" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-836" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and a few editions combine it with stanza 13. <a href="brot-af-sigurtharkvithu.xhtml#noteref-836" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-837" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Slayer of hosts</dfn>: warrior (Gunnar). <dfn>Raven and eagle</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 5. <a href="brot-af-sigurtharkvithu.xhtml#noteref-837" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-838" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mogk regards stanzas 16 and 17 as interpolated, but on not very satisfactory grounds. On the death of Gunnar <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Drap Niflunga</i>. <a href="brot-af-sigurtharkvithu.xhtml#noteref-838" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-839" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap is indicated in the manuscript, and some editions attach these two lines to stanza 16. <dfn>Niflungs</dfn>: this name (German Nibelungen), meaning “sons of the mist,” seems to have belonged originally to the race of supernatural beings to which the treasure belonged in the German version. It was subsequently extended to include the Gjukungs and their Burgundians. This question, of minor importance in the Norse poems, has evoked an enormous amount of learned discussion in connection with the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="de">Nibelungenlied</i>. <a href="brot-af-sigurtharkvithu.xhtml#noteref-839" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-840" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Footprints</dfn>: the actual mingling of blood in one another’s footprints was a part of the ceremony of swearing blood-brotherhood, the oath which Gunnar and Sigurth had taken. The fourth line refers to the fact that Sigurth had won many battles for Gunnar. <a href="brot-af-sigurtharkvithu.xhtml#noteref-840" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-841" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Regarding the sword episode <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 41 and note. <dfn>Wound-staff</dfn>: sword. <a href="brot-af-sigurtharkvithu.xhtml#noteref-841" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-842" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This prose passage has in the manuscript, written in red, the phrase “Of Sigurth’s Death” as a heading; there is no break between it and the prose introducing <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, the heading for that poem coming just before stanza 1. This note is of special interest as an effort at real criticism. The annotator, troubled by the two versions of the story of Sigurth’s death, feels it incumbent on him not only to point the fact out, but to cite the authority of “German men” for the form which appears in this poem. The alternative version, wherein Sigurth is slain in bed, appears in <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarhvot</i>, and <i xml:lang="non">Hamthesmol</i>, and also in the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>, which tells how Gotthorm tried twice to kill Sigurth but was terrified by the brightness of his eyes, and succeeded only after the hero had fallen asleep. That the annotator was correct in citing German authority for the slaying of Sigurth in the forest is shown by the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="de">Nibelungenlied</i> and the <i xml:lang="non">Thithrekssaga</i>. The “old” Guthrun lay is unquestionably <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>. <a href="brot-af-sigurtharkvithu.xhtml#noteref-842" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Guthrunarkvitha I -->
				<li id="note-843" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The prose follows the concluding prose of the <i xml:lang="non">Brot</i> without indication of a break, the heading standing immediately before stanza 1. <dfn>Fafnir’s heart</dfn>: this bit of information is here quite without point, and it is nowhere else stated that Guthrun understood the speech of birds. In the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> it is stated that Sigurth gave Guthrun some of Fafnir’s heart to eat, “and thereafter she was much grimmer than before, and wiser.” <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-843" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-844" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza seems to be based on <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, 11⁠–⁠12. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-844" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-845" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gjaflaug</dfn>: nothing further is known of this aunt of Guthrun, or of the many relatives whom she has lost. Very likely she is an invention of the poet’s, for it seems improbable that otherwise all further trace of her should have been lost. Line 4 has been marked by many editors as spurious. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-845" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-846" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors assume the loss of a line, after either line 1 or line 3. I prefer to believe that here and in stanza 10 the poet knew exactly what he was doing, and that both stanzas are correct. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-846" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-847" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Herborg</dfn>: neither she nor her sorrows are elsewhere mentioned, nor is it clear what a “queen of the Huns” is doing in Gunnar’s home, but the word “Hun” has little definiteness of meaning in the poems, and is frequently applied to Sigurth himself (<abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 24). Herborg appears from stanza 11 to have been the foster-mother of Gollrond, Guthrun’s sister. Lines 5⁠–⁠7 may be interpolations, or may form a separate stanza. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-847" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-848" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 1 and 2 stand in reversed order in the manuscript; I have followed Gering’s conjectural transposition. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-848" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-849" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herborg implies that the queen’s jealousy was not altogether misplaced. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-849" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-850" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> stanza 5 and note. The manuscript abbreviates to first letters. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-850" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-851" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gollrond</dfn>: not elsewhere mentioned. Line 4 looks like an interpolation replacing a line previously lost. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-851" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-852" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, and some editors have attempted to follow this arrangement. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-852" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-853" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many editors assume the loss of a line from this stanza. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-853" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-854" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The word here translated “tresses” is sheer guesswork. The detail of the geese is taken from <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 29, line 3 here being identical with line 4 of that stanza. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-854" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-855" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 1, abbreviated in the manuscript, very likely should be simply “Gollrond spake.” <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-855" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-856" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, 2. The manuscript does not name the speaker, and some editions have a first line,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Then Guthrun spake,</span>
								<span>the daughter of Gjuki.” <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-856" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-857" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Herjan</dfn>: Othin; his maids are the Valkyries; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 31, where the same phrase is used. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-857" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-858" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 4 looks like an interpolation (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>, 9, line 4), but some editors instead have queried line 5. How Guthrun’s curse is fulfilled is told in the subsequent poems. That desire for Sigurth’s treasure (the gold cursed by Andvari and Loki) was one of the motives for his murder is indicated in <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i> (stanza 16), and was clearly a part of the German tradition, as it appears in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="de">Nibelungenlied</i>. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-858" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-859" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 35 and note. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-859" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-860" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 1 is abbreviated in the manuscript. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-860" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-861" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Editors are agreed that this stanza shows interpolations, but differ as to the lines to reject. Line 4 (literally “every wave of ill-doing drives thee”) is substantially a proverb, and line 5, with its apparently meaningless reference to “seven” kings, may easily have come from some other source. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-861" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-862" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The stanza is obviously in bad shape; perhaps it represents two separate stanzas, or perhaps three of the lines are later additions. <dfn>Atli</dfn>: Brynhild here blames her brother, following the frequent custom of transferring the responsibility for a murder (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, 33), because he compelled her to marry Gunnar against her will, an idea which the poet seems to have gained from <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 32⁠–⁠39. These stanzas represent an entirely different version of the story, wherein Atli, attacked by Gunnar and Sigurth, buys them off by giving Gunnar his sister, Brynhild, as wife. He seems to have induced the latter to marry Gunnar by falsely telling her that Gunnar was Sigurth (a rationalistic explanation of the interchange of forms described in the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> and <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 37⁠–⁠39). In the present stanza Atli is made to do this out of desire for Sigurth’s treasure. <dfn>Hunnish race</dfn>: this may be merely an error (neither Gunnar nor Sigurth could properly have been connected in any way with Atli and his Huns), based on <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, wherein Sigurth appears more than once as the “Hunnish king.” The North was very much in the dark as to the differences between Germans, Burgundians, Franks, Goths, and Huns, and used the words without much discrimination. On the other hand, it may refer to Sigurth’s appearance when, adorned with gold, he came with Gunnar to besiege Atli, in the alternative version of the story just cited (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 36). <dfn>Flame of the snake’s bed</dfn>: gold, so called because serpents and dragons were the traditional guardians of treasure, on which they lay. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-862" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-863" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript has “Gunnar” in place of “Guthrun,” but this is an obvious mistake; the entire prose passage is based on <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, 14. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> likewise merely paraphrases <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, and nothing further is known of Thora or her father, Hokon, though many inconclusive attempts have been made to identify the latter. <dfn>Brynhild</dfn>: the story of her death is told in great detail in the latter part of <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-1.xhtml#noteref-863" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Sigurtharkvitha en Skamma -->
				<li id="note-864" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gjuki</dfn>: father of <dfn>the brothers twain</dfn>, Gunnar and Hogni, and of <dfn>Guthrun</dfn>. In this version of the story Sigurth goes straight to the home of the Gjukungs after his victory over the dragon Fafnir, without meeting Brynhild on the way (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 13 and note). <dfn>Volsung</dfn>: Sigurth’s grandfather was Volsung; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i> and note. <dfn>Oaths</dfn>: regarding the blood-brotherhood sworn by Sigurth, Gunnar, and Hogni <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Brot</i>, 18 and note. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-864" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-865" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Brynhild</dfn>: on the winning of Brynhild by Sigurth in Gunnar’s shape <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 37 and note. The poet here omits details, and in stanzas 32⁠–⁠39 appears a quite different tradition regarding the winning of Brynhild, which I suspect he had in mind throughout the poem. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-865" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-866" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Southern hero</dfn>: Sigurth, whose Frankish origin is seldom wholly lost sight of in the Norse versions of the story. On the episode of the sword <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 41 and note. Line 3 may well be an interpolation; both lines 4 and 5 have also been questioned, and some editions combine line 5 with lines 1⁠–⁠3 of stanza 5. <dfn>Hunnish king</dfn>: Sigurth, who was, of course, not a king of the Huns, but was occasionally so called in the later poems owing to the lack of ethnological distinction made by the Norse poets (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 24 and note). <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-866" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-867" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza may refer, as Gering thinks, merely to the fact that Brynhild lived happy and unsuspecting as Gunnar’s wife until the fatal quarrel with Guthrun (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 45 and note) revealed to her the deceit whereby she had been won, or it may refer to the version of the story which appears in stanzas 32⁠–⁠39, wherein Brynhild lived happily with Atli, her brother, until he was attacked by Gunnar and Sigurth, and was compelled to give his sister to Gunnar, winning her consent thereto by representing Gunnar as Sigurth, her chosen hero (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 24 and note). The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and many editors combine it with stanza 6. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-867" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-868" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brynhild has now discovered the deceit that has been practised on her. That she had loved Sigurth from the outset (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 40) fits well with the version of the story wherein Sigurth meets her before he comes to Gunnar’s home (the version not used in this poem), or the one outlined in the note on stanza 5, but does not accord with the story of Sigurth’s first meeting Brynhild in Gunnar’s form⁠—an added reason for believing that the poet in stanzas 5⁠–⁠6 had in mind the story represented by stanzas 32⁠–⁠39. <dfn>The hero</dfn>: the manuscript originally had the phrase thus, then corrected it to “though I die,” and finally crossed out the correction. Many editions have “I.” <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-868" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-869" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Perhaps a line is missing after line 3. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-869" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-870" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Glacier</dfn>: a bit of Icelandic (or Greenland) local color. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-870" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-871" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 1 does not appear in the manuscript, and is based on a conjecture by Bugge. Some editions add line 2 to stanza 8. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, and some editors assume a gap of two lines after line 4. <dfn>Hunnish king</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 4. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-871" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-872" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Lands</dfn>: Brynhild’s wealth again points to the story represented by stanzas 32⁠–⁠39; elsewhere she is not spoken of as bringing wealth to Gunnar. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-872" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-873" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 5, or perhaps line 3, may be interpolated. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-873" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-874" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The son</dfn>: the three-year-old son of Sigurth and Guthrun, Sigmund, who was killed at Brynhild’s behest. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-874" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-875" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza has been the subject of many conjectural emendations. Some editions assume a gap after line 2, and make a separate stanza of lines 3⁠–⁠7; others mark lines 5⁠–⁠7 as spurious. The stanza seems to have been expanded by repetition. <dfn>Grief</dfn> (line 1): the manuscript has “wrath,” involving a metrical error. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-875" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-876" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bugge and Gering transfer lines 4⁠–⁠5 to the beginning of stanza 16, on the basis of the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase, and assume a gap of one line after line 3. Line 5, which is in the nature of a stereotyped clause, may well be interpolated. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-876" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-877" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>After “Buthli” in line 2 the manuscript has “my brother,” apparently a scribal error. In line 4 the manuscript has “wealth” instead of “love,” apparently with stanza 10 in mind, but the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase has “love,” and many editors have suspected an error. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-877" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-878" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> note on stanza 14. After thus adding lines 4⁠–⁠5 of stanza 14 at the beginning of stanza 16, Gering marks line 4 as probably spurious; others reject both lines 3 and 4 as mere repetitions. <dfn>Rhine</dfn>: the Rhine, the sands of which traditionally contained gold, was apparently the original home of the treasure of the Nibelungs, converted in the North to Andvari’s treasure (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i>, 1⁠–⁠9). That greed for Sigurth’s wealth was one of the motives for his slaying is indicated likewise in <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 20, and in the German versions of the story. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-878" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-879" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>We four</dfn>: if line 1 of stanza 19 is spurious, or the reference therein to “five” is a blunder, as may well be the case, then the “four” are Sigurth and the three brothers, Gunnar, Hogni, and Gotthorm. But it may be that the poet had in mind a tradition which, as in the <i xml:lang="non">Thithrekssaga</i>, gave Gjuki a fourth son, in which case the “four” refers only to the four Gjukungs. <dfn>Hunnish hero</dfn>: Sigurth; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 4 and note. Some editions put line 4 between lines 1 and 2. Some add lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 19 to stanza 18, marking them as spurious. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-879" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-880" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>We five</dfn>: see note on preceding stanza. Some editors mark lines 1⁠–⁠2 as spurious, and either assume a gap of two lines after line 4 or combine lines 3⁠–⁠4 with stanza 20. <dfn>Whence lead the ways</dfn>: a proverbial expression signifying “whence the trouble comes.” <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-880" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-881" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name the speaker. <dfn>Gotthorm</dfn> (the name is variously spelt): half-brother of Gunnar and Hogni (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hyndluljoth</i>, 27 and note, and <i xml:lang="non">Brot</i>, 4 and note). The name is the northern form of Gundomar; a prince of this name is mentioned in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Lex Burgundionum</i>, apparently as a brother of Gundahari (Gundicarius). In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="de">Nibelungenlied</i> the third brother is called Gernot. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-881" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-882" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap is indicated in the manuscript, and many editors combine stanza 21 with stanza 22, but it seems likely that not only two lines, but one or more stanzas in addition, have been lost; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Brot</i>, 4, and also the detailed account of the slaying of Sigurth in the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>, wherein, as here, Sigurth is killed in his bed (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 24) and not in the forest. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-882" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-883" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions combine lines 3⁠–⁠4 with stanza 23. <dfn>Gram</dfn>: Sigurth’s sword (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i>, prose after stanza 14); the word here, however, may not be a proper name, but may mean “the hero.” <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-883" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-884" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A line may well have been lost from this stanza. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-884" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-885" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Freyr</dfn>: if the phrase “the friend of Freyr” means anything more than “king” (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Rigsthula</i>, 46 <abbr>etc.</abbr>), which I doubt, it has reference to the late tradition that Freyr, and not Othin, was the ancestor of the Volsungs (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 57 and note). <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-885" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-886" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Müllenhoff thinks this stanza, or at any rate lines 1⁠–⁠2, a later addition based on stanza 29. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-886" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-887" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>My son</dfn>: Sigmund; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 12 and note, and also <i xml:lang="non">Brot</i>, 9 and note. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-887" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-888" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sigurth means that although Guthrun may have seven sons by a later marriage, none of them will equal Sigmund, “son of their (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Gunnar’s and Hogni’s) sister.” <dfn>Thing</dfn>: council. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-888" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-889" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sigurth’s protestation of guiltlessness fits perfectly with the story of his relations with Brynhild used in this poem, but not, of course, with the alternative version, used in the <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i> and elsewhere, wherein Sigurth meets Brynhild before he woos her for Gunnar, and they have a daughter, Aslaug. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-889" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-890" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 15. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-890" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-891" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Brot</i>, 10. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-891" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-892" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 1 may well be a mere expansion of “Gunnar spake.” The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and some editions combine lines 4⁠–⁠5 with stanza 32. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-892" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-893" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza, which all editors have accepted as an integral part of the poem, apparently refers to the same story represented by stanzas 37⁠–⁠39, which most editors have (I believe mistakenly) marked as interpolated. As is pointed out in the notes on stanzas 3, 5, 6 and 10, the poet throughout seems to have accepted the version of the story wherein Gunnar and Sigurth besiege Atli, and are bought off by the gift of Atli’s sister, Brynhild, to Gunnar as wife, her consent being won by Atli’s representation that Gunnar is Sigurth (<abbr>cf.</abbr> also <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 24 and note). <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-893" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-894" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name the speaker, and some editions add a first line:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Then Brynhild, daughter</span>
								<span>of Buthli, spake.” <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-894" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-895" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> stanza 5. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-895" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-896" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Three kings</dfn>: Gunnar, Hogni, and Sigurth. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-896" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-897" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions place this stanza after stanza 39, on the theory that stanzas 37⁠–⁠39 are interpolated. Line 4, as virtually a repetition of line 3, has generally been marked as spurious. In this version of the winning of Brynhild it appears that Atli pointed out Sigurth as Gunnar, and Brynhild promptly fell in love with the hero whom, as he rode on <dfn>Grani</dfn> and was decked with some of the spoils taken from Fafnir, she recognized as the dragon’s slayer. Thus no change of form between Sigurth and Gunnar was necessary. The oath to marry Gunnar had to be carried out even after Brynhild had discovered the deception. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-897" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-898" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Most editors mark stanzas 37⁠–⁠39 as interpolated, but <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 32. Stanza 37 has been variously emended. Lines 4 and 6 look like interpolated repetitions, but many editors make two stanzas, following the manuscript in beginning a new stanza with line 4. After line 1 Grundtvig adds:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Son of Buthli,</span>
								<span>and brother of mine.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>After line 6 Bugge adds:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Not thou was it, Gunnar,</span>
								<span>who Grani rode,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>Though thou my brother</span>
								<span>with rings didst buy.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Regarding Brynhild’s wealth <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 10 and note. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-898" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-899" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brynhild here again appears as a Valkyrie. The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza. Any one of the last three lines may be spurious. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-899" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-900" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions combine this stanza with lines 4⁠–⁠5 of stanza 38, with lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 40, or with the whole of stanza 40. <dfn>The bond</dfn>: Brynhild thought she was marrying Sigurth, owner of the treasure, whereas she was being tricked into marrying Gunnar. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-900" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-901" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>At this point there seem to be several omissions. Brynhild’s statement in lines 1⁠–⁠2 seems to refer to the episode, not here mentioned but told in detail in the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>, of Sigurth’s effort to repair the wrong that has been done her by himself giving up Guthrun in her favor, an offer which she refuses. The lacuna here suggested, which is not indicated in the manuscript, may be simply a single line (line 1) or a stanza or more. After line 2 there is almost certainly a gap of at least one stanza, and possibly more, in which Brynhild states her determination to die. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-901" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-902" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hardly any two editions agree as to the arrangement of the lines in stanzas 42⁠–⁠44. I have followed the manuscript except in transposing line 4 of stanza 43 to this position from the place it holds in the manuscript after line 4 of stanza 44. All the other arrangements involve the rejection of two or more lines as spurious and the assumption of various gaps. Gering and Sijmons both arrange the lines thus: 42, 1⁠–⁠2; two-line gap; 43, 3 (marked probably spurious); 44, 1⁠–⁠4; 43⁠–⁠4 (marked probably spurious); 42, 3⁠–⁠4; 43, 1⁠–⁠2. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-902" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-903" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> note on preceding stanza. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-903" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-904" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> note on stanza 42. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-904" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-905" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Perhaps the remains of two stanzas; the manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and after line 4 an added line has been suggested:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“She was ever known</span>
								<span>for evil thoughts.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>On the other hand, line 1, identical with line 1 of stanza 17, may well be a mere expansion of “Hogni spake,” and line 6 may have been introduced, with a slight variation, from line 5 of stanza 38. <dfn>Born again</dfn>: this looks like a trace of Christian influence (the poem was composed well after the coming of Christianity to Iceland) in the assumption that if Brynhild killed herself she could not be “born again” (<abbr>cf.</abbr> concluding prose to <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>). <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-905" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-906" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a stanza; some editions treat lines 1⁠–⁠2 as a separate stanza, and combine lines 3⁠–⁠4 with lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 47. <dfn>Jewel-bearer</dfn> (literally “land of jewels”): woman, here Brynhild. <dfn>Bond-women</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: in stanza 69 we learn that five female slaves and eight serfs were killed to be burned on the funeral pyre, and thus to follow Sigurth in death. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-906" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-907" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 3, and not line 1, as beginning a stanza, and some editions treat lines 3⁠–⁠4 as a separate stanza, or combine them with stanza 48. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-907" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-908" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brynhild means, as stanzas 49⁠–⁠51 show, that those of her women who wish to win rewards must be ready to follow her in death. The word translated “women” in line 1 is conjectural, but the general meaning is clear enough. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-908" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-909" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In place of “as so she spake” in line 1 the manuscript has “of their plans they thought,” which involves a metrical error. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-909" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-910" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap indicated in the manuscript; many editions place it between lines 3 and 4. <dfn>Menja’s wealth</dfn>: gold; the story of the mill Grotti, whereby the giantesses Menja and Fenja ground gold for King Frothi, is told in the <i xml:lang="non">Grottasongr</i>. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-910" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-911" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With this stanza begins Brynhild’s prophesy of what is to befall Gunnar, Guthrun, Atli, and the many others involved in their fate. Line 3 is a proverbial expression meaning simply “your troubles are not at an end.” <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-911" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-912" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap is indicated in the manuscript; one suggestion for line 2 runs:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Grimhild shall make her</span>
								<span>to laugh once more.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Gering suggests a loss of three lines, and joins lines 3⁠–⁠4 with stanza 54. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-912" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-913" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Probably a line has been lost from this stanza. Grundtvig adds as a new first line:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Her shalt thou find</span>
								<span>in the hall of Half.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Some editions query line 3 as possibly spurious. <dfn>Svanhild</dfn>: the figure of Svanhild is exceedingly old. The name means “Swan-Maiden-Warrior,” applying to just such mixtures of swan-maiden and Valkyrie as appear in the <i xml:lang="non">Völundarkvitha</i>. Originally part of a separate tradition, Svanhild appears first to have been incorporated in the Jormunrek (Ermanarich) story as the unhappy wife of that monarch, and much later to have been identified as the daughter of Sigurth and Guthrun, thus linking the two sets of legends. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-913" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-914" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 2 in the original is almost totally obscure. Line 4 should very possibly precede line 2, while line 5 looks like an unwarranted addition. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-914" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-915" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza probably ought to follow stanza 52, as it refers solely to the winning of Brynhild by Gunnar and Sigurth. Müllenhoff regards stanzas 53⁠–⁠55 as interpolated. The manuscript indicates no gap after line 3. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-915" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-916" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanzas 57⁠–⁠58 seem to be the remains of two stanzas, but the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase follows closely the form here given. Line 3 may well be spurious; line 5 has likewise been questioned. <dfn>Oddrun</dfn>: this sister of Atli and Brynhild, known mainly through the <i xml:lang="non">Oddrunargratr</i>, is a purely northern addition to the cycle, and apparently one of a relatively late date. She figures solely by reason of her love affair with Gunnar. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-916" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-917" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Possibly two lines have been lost; many editions combine the two remaining lines with lines 1⁠–⁠3 of stanza 59. Concerning the manner of Gunnar’s death <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Drap Niflunga</i>. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-917" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-918" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 3 may well be spurious, as it is largely repetition. The manuscript has “<span xml:lang="non">sofa</span>” (“sleep”) in place of “<span xml:lang="non">sona</span>” (“sons”), but the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase says clearly “sons.” The slaying of Atli by Guthrun in revenge for his killing of her brothers is told in the two Atli lays. The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and some editions make a separate stanza out of lines 4⁠–⁠5, or else combine them with stanza 60. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-918" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-919" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>To follow in death</dfn>: this phrase is not in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i>, but is included in late paper manuscripts, and has been added in most editions. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-919" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-920" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Jonak</dfn>: this king, known only through the <i xml:lang="non">Hamthesmol</i> and the stories which, like this one, are based thereon, is another purely northern addition to the legend. The name is apparently of Slavic origin. He appears solely as Guthrun’s third husband and the father of Hamther, Sorli, and Erp (<abbr>cf.</abbr> introductory prose to <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarhvot</i>). <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-920" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-921" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Svanhild</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 54 and note. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-921" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-922" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Bikki</dfn>: Svanhild is married to the aged Jormunrek (Ermanarich), but Bikki, one of his followers, suggests that she is unduly intimate with Jormunrek’s son, Randver. Thereupon Jormunrek has Randver hanged, and Svanhild torn to pieces by wild horses. Ermanarich’s cruelty and his barbarous slaying of his wife and son were familiar traditions long before they became in any way connected with the Sigurth cycle (<abbr>cf.</abbr> introductory note to <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>). <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-922" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-923" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 5 is very probably spurious. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-923" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-924" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates no gap; a suggested addition runs</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Gold let there be,</span>
								<span>and jewels bright.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><dfn>Fallen slaves</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanzas 66 and 69. <dfn>Hunnish hero</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 4 and note. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-924" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-925" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In place of lines 3⁠–⁠4 the manuscript has one line</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Two at his head,</span>
								<span>and a pair of hawks”;</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>the addition is made from the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase. The burning or burying of slaves or beasts to accompany their masters in death was a general custom in the North. The number of slaves indicated in this stanza does not tally with the one given in stanza 69, wherefore Vigfusson rejects most of this stanza. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-925" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-926" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 41 and note. After line 1 the manuscript adds the phrase “bright, ring-decked,” referring to the sword, but it is metrically impossible, and many editions omit it. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-926" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-927" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The door</dfn>: The gate of Hel’s domain, like that of Mengloth’s house (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Svipdagsmol</i>, 26 and note), closes so fast as to catch any one attempting to pass through. Apparently the poet here assumes that the gate of Valhall does likewise, but that it will be kept open for Sigurth’s retinue. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-927" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-928" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> stanza 66. <a href="sigurtharkvitha-en-skamma.xhtml#noteref-928" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Helreith Brynhildar -->
				<li id="note-929" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The prose follows the last stanza of <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i> without break. <dfn>Two bale-fires</dfn>: this contradicts the statement made in the concluding stanzas of <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, that Sigurth and Brynhild were burned on the same pyre; there is no evidence that the annotator here had anything but his own mistaken imagination to go on. <a href="helreith-brynhildar.xhtml#noteref-929" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-930" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Valland</dfn>: this name (“Land of Slaughter”) is used elsewhere of mythical places; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 24, and prose introduction to <i xml:lang="non">Völundarkvitha</i>; it may here not be a proper name at all. <dfn>Gold-goddess</dfn>: poetic circumlocution for “woman.” <a href="helreith-brynhildar.xhtml#noteref-930" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-931" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i> these two lines stand after stanza 7, but most editions place them as here. They are not quoted in the <i xml:lang="non">Nornageststhattr</i>. Presumably two lines, and perhaps more, have been lost. It has frequently been argued that all or part of the passage from stanza 6 through stanza 10 (6⁠–⁠10, 7⁠–⁠10 or 8⁠–⁠10) comes originally from the so-called <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i>, where it would undoubtedly fit exceedingly well. <dfn>Hild</dfn>: a Valkyrie name meaning “Fighter” (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 31). In such compound names as Brynhild (“Fighter in Armor”) the first element was occasionally omitted. <dfn>Hlymdalir</dfn> (“Tumult-Dale”): a mythical name, merely signifying the place of battle as the home of Valkyries. <a href="helreith-brynhildar.xhtml#noteref-931" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-932" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Regarding the identification of swan-maidens with Valkyries, and the manner in which men could get them in their power by stealing their swan-garments, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Völundarkvitha</i>, introductory prose and note, where the same thing happens. <dfn>The monarch</dfn>: perhaps Agnar, brother of Autha, mentioned in <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i> (prose and quoted verse following stanza 4) as the warrior for whose sake Brynhild defied Othin in slaying Hjalmgunnar. <dfn>Eight</dfn>: the <i xml:lang="non">Nornageststhattr</i> manuscripts have “sisters of Atli” instead of “sisters eight.” <a href="helreith-brynhildar.xhtml#noteref-932" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-933" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hjalmgunnar</dfn>: regarding this king of the Goths (the phrase means little) and his battle with Agnar, brother of <dfn>Autha</dfn>, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i>, prose after stanza 4. One <i xml:lang="non">Nornageststhattr</i> manuscript has “brother of the giantess” in place of “leader of Goths.” <a href="helreith-brynhildar.xhtml#noteref-933" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-934" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i>, prose introduction. <dfn>Skatalund</dfn> (“Warriors’ Grove”): a mythical name; elsewhere the place where Brynhild lay is called Hindarfjoll. <a href="helreith-brynhildar.xhtml#noteref-934" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-935" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Branches’ foe</dfn>: fire. Regarding the treasure <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>. <a href="helreith-brynhildar.xhtml#noteref-935" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-936" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza is presumably an interpolation, reflecting a different version of the story, wherein Sigurth meets Brynhild at the home of her brother-in-law and foster-father, Heimir (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 19 and 27). <dfn>Grani</dfn>: Sigurth’s horse. <dfn>Danes</dfn>: nowhere else does Sigurth appear in this capacity. Perhaps this is a curious relic of the Helgi tradition. <a href="helreith-brynhildar.xhtml#noteref-936" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-937" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Eight nights</dfn>: elsewhere (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 42) the time is stated as three nights, not eight. There is a confusion of traditions here, as in <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>. In the version of the story wherein Sigurth met Brynhild before he encountered the Gjukungs, Sigurth was bound by no oaths, and the union was completed; it is only in the alternative version that the episode of the sword laid between the two occurs. <a href="helreith-brynhildar.xhtml#noteref-937" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-938" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The idea apparently conveyed in the concluding lines, that Sigurth and Brynhild will be together in some future life, is utterly out of keeping with the Norse pagan traditions, and the whole stanza indicates the influence of Christianity. <a href="helreith-brynhildar.xhtml#noteref-938" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Drap Niflunga -->
				<li id="note-939" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Niflungs</dfn>: regarding the mistaken application of this name to the sons of Gjuki, who were Burgundians, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Brot</i>, 17 and note. <dfn>Draught of forgetfulness</dfn>: according to the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> Grimhild, Guthrun’s mother, administered this, just as she did the similar draught which made Sigurth forget Brynhild. <dfn>Erp and Eitil</dfn>: Guthrun kills her two sons by Atli as part of her revenge; the annotator here explains her act further by saying that Guthrun asked her sons to intercede with their father in favor of Guthrun’s brothers, but that they refused, a detail which he appears to have invented, as it is found nowhere else. <dfn>Svanhild</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 54 and note. <dfn>Vingi or Knefröth</dfn>: <i xml:lang="non">Atlakvitha</i> (stanza 1) calls the messenger Knefröth; <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i> (stanza 4) speaks of two messengers, but names only one of them, Vingi. The annotator has here tried, unsuccessfully, to combine the two accounts. <dfn>Andvaranaut</dfn>: regarding the origin of Andvari’s ring <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i>, prose after stanzas 4 and 5 and notes; Sigurth gave the ring to Guthrun. Here again the annotator is combining two stories; in <i xml:lang="non">Atlakvitha</i> (stanza 8) Guthrun sends a ring (not Andvaranaut) with a wolf’s hair; in <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i> (stanza 4) she sends a message written in runes. The messenger obscures these runes, and Kostbera, Hogni’s wife, who attempts to decipher them, is not clear as to their meaning, though she suspects danger. <dfn>Oddrun</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 57 and note. <dfn>Glaumvor</dfn>: almost nothing is told of Gunnar’s second wife, though she appears frequently in the <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i>. <dfn>Kostbera</dfn> (or Bera), Hogni’s wife, is known only as skilled in runes. Her brother was Orkning. The sons of Hogni and Kostbera, according to the <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i> (stanza 28), were <dfn>Solar</dfn> and <dfn>Snævar</dfn>; the third son, <dfn>Gjuki</dfn>, named after his grandfather, seems to be an invention of the annotator’s. <dfn>Adder</dfn>: according to <i xml:lang="non">Oddrunargratr</i> (stanza 30) Atli’s mother assumed this form in order to complete her son’s vengeance. <a href="drap-niflunga.xhtml#noteref-939" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Guthrunarkvitha II, en Forna -->
				<li id="note-940" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Thjothrek</dfn>: the famous Theoderich, king of the Ostrogoths, who became renowned in German story as Dietrich von Bern. The German tradition early accepted the anachronism of bringing together Attila (Etzel, Atli), who died in 453, and Theoderich, who was born about 455, and adding thereto Ermanarich (Jormunrek), king of the Goths, who died about 376. Ermanarich, in German tradition, replaced Theoderich’s actual enemy, Odovakar, and it was in battle with Jormunrek (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Odovakar) that Thjothrek is here said to have lost most of his men. The annotator found the material for this note in <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></i>, in which Guthrun is accused of having Thjothrek as her lover. At the time when <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i> was composed (early tenth century) it is probable that the story of Theoderich had not reached the North at all, and the annotator is consequently wrong in giving the poem its setting. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-940" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-941" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 17. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-941" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-942" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Regarding the varying accounts of the manner of Sigurth’s death <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Brot</i>, concluding prose and note. <dfn>Grani</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Brot</i>, 7. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-942" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-943" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap indicated in the manuscript. Some editions combine these two lines with either stanza 5 or stanza 7. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-943" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-944" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gotthorm</dfn>: from this it appears that in both versions of the death of Sigurth the mortally wounded hero killed his murderer, the younger brother of Gunnar and Hogni. The story of how Gotthorm was slain after killing Sigurth in his bed is told in <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 22⁠–⁠23, and in the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-944" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-945" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On lines 3⁠–⁠4 <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 1. Line 5 is probably spurious. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-945" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-946" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many editions make one stanza of stanzas 12 and 13, reconstructing line 3; the manuscript shows no gap. Bugge fills out the stanza thus:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“The wolves were howling</span>
								<span>on all the ways,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>The eagles cried</span>
								<span>as their food they craved.” <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-946" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-947" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> note on preceding stanza. Grundtvig suggests as a first line:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Long did I bide,</span>
								<span>my brothers awaiting.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Many editors reject line 4. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-947" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-948" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a stanza, and many editions combine lines 3⁠–⁠4 with lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 15. <dfn>Hoalf</dfn> (or Half): Gering thinks this Danish king may be identical with Alf, son of King Hjalprek, and second husband of Hjordis, Sigurth’s mother (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i> and note), but the name was a common one. <dfn>Thora</dfn> and <dfn>Hokon</dfn> have not been identified (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, concluding prose, which is clearly based on this stanza). A Thora appears in <i xml:lang="non">Hyndluljoth</i>, 18, as the wife of Dag, one of the sons of Halfdan the Old, the most famous of Denmark’s mythical kings, and one of her sons is Alf (Hoalf?). <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-948" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-949" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza. Some editors combine lines 5⁠–⁠6 with lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 16, while others mark them as interpolated. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-949" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-950" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions combine lines 3⁠–⁠4 with stanza 17. <dfn>Sigmund</dfn>: Sigurth’s father, who here appears as a sea-rover in Guthrun’s tapestry. <dfn>Sigar</dfn>: named in <i xml:lang="non">Fornaldar sögur</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 10, as the father of <dfn>Siggeir</dfn>, the latter being the husband of Sigmund’s twin sister, Signy (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i>). <dfn>Fjon</dfn>: this name, referring to the Danish island of Fünen, is taken from the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase as better fitting the Danish setting of the stanza than the name in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Regius</i>, which is “Fife” (Scotland). <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-950" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-951" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap is indicated in the manuscript, and most editions combine these two lines either with lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 16, with lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 18, or with the whole of stanza 18. Line 2 has been filled out in various ways. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase indicates that these two lines are the remains of a full stanza, the prose passage running: “Now Guthrun was somewhat comforted of her sorrows. Then Grimhild learned where Guthrun was now dwelling.” The first two lines may be the ones missing. <dfn>Gothic</dfn>: the term “Goth” was used in the North without much discrimination to apply to all south-Germanic peoples. In <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 35, Gunnar, Grimhild’s son, appears as “lord of the Goths.” <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-951" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-952" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza. Grimhild is eager to have amends made to Guthrun for the slaying of Sigurth and their son, Sigmund, because Atli has threatened war if he cannot have Guthrun for his wife. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-952" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-953" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 5⁠–⁠6 are almost certainly interpolations, made by a scribe with a very vague understanding of the meaning of the stanza, which refers simply to the journey of the Gjukungs to bring their sister home from Denmark. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-953" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-954" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 1⁠–⁠2 are probably interpolated, though the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> includes the names. Some one apparently attempted to supply the names of Atli’s messengers, the “long-beard men” of line 4, who have come to ask for Guthrun’s hand. Some commentators assume, as the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> does, that these messengers went with the Gjukungs to Denmark in search of Guthrun, but it seems more likely that a transitional stanza has dropped out after stanza 19, and that Guthrun received Atli’s emissaries in her brothers’ home. <dfn>Long-beards</dfn>: the word may actually mean Langobards or Lombards, but, if it does, it is presumably without any specific significance here. Certainly the names in the interpolated two lines do not fit either Lombards or Huns, for Valdar is identified as a Dane, and Jarizleif and Jarizskar are apparently Slavic. The manuscript indicates line 5 as beginning a new stanza. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-954" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-955" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Each</dfn>: the reference is presumably to Gunnar and Hogni, and perhaps also Grimhild. I suspect that this stanza belongs before stanza 20. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-955" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-956" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanzas 22⁠–⁠25 describe the draught of forgetfulness which Grimhild gives Guthrun, just as she gave one to Sigurth (in one version of the story) to make him forget Brynhild. The draught does not seem to work despite Guthrun’s statement in stanza 25 (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 30), for which reason Vigfusson, not unwisely, places stanzas 22⁠–⁠25 after stanza 34. <dfn>Blood of swine</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hyndluljoth</i>, 39 and note. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-956" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-957" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> quotes stanzas 23⁠–⁠24. <dfn>Heather-fish</dfn>: a snake. <dfn>Haddings’ land</dfn>: the world of the dead, so called because, according to Saxo Grammaticus, the Danish king Hadingus once visited it. It is possible that the comma should follow “heather-fish,” making the “ear uncut” (of grain) come from the world of the dead. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-957" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-958" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Dew of the hearth</dfn>: soot. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-958" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-959" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript, and in some editions, the first line is in the third person plural:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Then they forgot,</span>
								<span>when the draught they had drunk.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The second line in the original is manifestly in bad shape, and has been variously emended. <dfn>I forgot</dfn>: this emendation is doubtful, in view of stanza 30, but <abbr>cf.</abbr> note to stanza 22. <dfn>The kings all three</dfn>: probably Atli’s emissaries, though the interpolated lines of stanza 20 name four of them. I suspect that line 4 is wrong, and should read:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Ere he himself (Atli)</span>
								<span>to speak began.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Certainly stanzas 26⁠–⁠27 fit Atli much better than they do Grimhild, and there is nothing unreasonable in Atli’s having come in person, along with his tributary kings, to seek Guthrun’s hand. However, the “three kings” may not be Atli’s followers at all, but Gunnar, Hogni, and the unnamed third brother possibly referred to in <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 18. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-959" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-960" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Thy father’s</dfn>: So the manuscript, in which case the reference is obviously to Gjuki. But some editions omit the “thy,” and if Atli, and not Grimhild, is speaking (<abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 25), the reference may be, as in line 3 of stanza 27, to the wealth of Atli’s father, Buthli. <dfn>Hlothver</dfn>: the northern form of the Frankish name Chlodowech (Ludwig), but who this Hlothver was, beyond the fact that he was evidently a Frankish king, is uncertain. If Atli is speaking, he is presumably a Frankish ruler whose land Atli and his Huns have conquered. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-960" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-961" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> note on stanza 25 as to the probable speaker. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-961" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-962" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In stanzas 28⁠–⁠32 the dialogue, in alternate stanzas, is clearly between Guthrun and her mother, Grimhild, though the manuscript does not indicate the speakers. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-962" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-963" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Sigmund</dfn>: son of Sigurth and Guthrun, killed at Brynhild’s behest. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-963" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-964" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza presents a strong argument for transposing the description of the draught of forgetfulness (stanzas 22⁠–⁠24 and lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 25) to follow stanza 33. <dfn>Raven</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: the original is somewhat obscure, and the line may refer simply to the “corpse-eating raven.” <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-964" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-965" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript this stanza is immediately followed by the two lines which here, following Bugge’s suggestion, appear as stanza 35. In lines 3⁠–⁠4 Guthrun foretells what will (and actually does) happen if she is forced to become Atli’s wife. If stanza 35 really belongs here, it continues the prophesy to the effect that Guthrun will have no rest till she has avenged her brothers’ death. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-965" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-966" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Very likely the remains of two stanzas; the manuscript marks line 4 as beginning a new stanza. On the other hand, lines 3 and 5 may be interpolations. <dfn>Vinbjorg</dfn> and <dfn>Valbjorg</dfn>: apparently imaginary place-names. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-966" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-967" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The kings</dfn>: presumably Gunnar and Hogni. <dfn>My sons</dfn>: regarding Guthrun’s slaying of her two sons by Atli, Erp and Eitil, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Drap Niflunga</i>, note. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-967" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-968" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript this stanza follows stanza 32. The loss of two lines, to the effect that “Ill was that marriage for my brothers, and ill for Atli himself,” and the transposition of the remaining two lines to this point, are indicated in a number of editions. <dfn>The warrior</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: Atli, whom Guthrun kills. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-968" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-969" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The stanza describes the journey to Atli’s home, and sundry unsuccessful efforts have been made to follow the travellers through Germany and down the Danube. <dfn>Foreign women</dfn>: slaves. Line 5, which the manuscript marks as beginning a stanza, is probably spurious. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-969" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-970" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>After these two lines there appears to be a considerable gap, the lost stanzas giving Guthrun’s story of the slaying of her brothers. It is possible that stanzas 38⁠–⁠45 came originally from another poem, dealing with Atli’s dream, and were here substituted for the original conclusion of Guthrun’s lament. Many editions combine stanzas 37 and 38, or combine stanza 38 (the manuscript marks line 1 as beginning a stanza) with lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 39. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-970" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-971" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza. The manuscript and most editions do not indicate the speakers in this and the following stanzas. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-971" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-972" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Guthrun, somewhat obscurely, interprets Atli’s first dream (stanza 39) to mean that she will cure him of an abscess by cauterizing it. Her interpretation is, of course, intended merely to blind him to her purpose. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-972" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-973" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In stanzas 41⁠–⁠43 Atli’s dreams forecast the death of his two sons, whose flesh Guthrun gives him to eat (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Atlakvitha</i>, 39, and <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i>, 78). <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-973" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-974" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza is evidently Guthrun’s intentionally cryptic interpretation of Atli’s dreams, but the meaning of the original is more than doubtful. The word here rendered “sacrifice” may mean “sea-catch,” and the one rendered “beasts” may mean “whales.” None of the attempted emendations have rendered the stanza really intelligible, but it appears to mean that Atli will soon make a sacrifice of beasts at night, and give their bodies to the people. Guthrun of course has in mind the slaying of his two sons. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-974" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-975" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With these two lines the poem abruptly ends; some editors assign the speech to Atli (I think rightly), others to Guthrun. Ettmüller combines the lines with stanza 38. Whether stanzas 38⁠–⁠45 originally belonged to Guthrun’s lament, or were interpolated here in place of the lost conclusion of that poem from another one dealing with Atli’s dreams (<abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 37), it is clear that the end has been lost. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-2.xhtml#noteref-975" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Guthrunarkvitha III -->
				<li id="note-976" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The annotator derived all the material for this note from the poem itself, except for the reference to Herkja as Atli’s former concubine. <dfn>Herkja</dfn>: the historical Kreka and the Helche of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="de">Nibelungenlied</i>, who there appears as Etzel’s (Attila’s) first wife. <dfn>Thjothrek</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> Introductory Note. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-3.xhtml#noteref-976" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-977" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript omits the names of the speakers throughout. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-3.xhtml#noteref-977" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-978" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Holy stone</dfn>: just what this refers to is uncertain; it may be identical with the “ice-cold stone of Uth” mentioned in an oath in <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, 29. <dfn>Thjothmar’s son</dfn>: the manuscript has simply “Thjothmar.” Some editions change it as here, some assume that Thjothmar is another name or an error for Thjothrek, and Finnur Jonsson not only retains Thjothmar here but changes Thjothrek to Thjothmar in stanza 5 to conform to it. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-3.xhtml#noteref-978" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-979" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Regarding the death of Thjothrek’s men <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, introductory prose, note. It was on these stanzas of <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></i> that the annotator based his introduction to <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>. The manuscript repeats the “thirty” in line 2, in defiance of metrical requirements. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-3.xhtml#noteref-979" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-980" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript this stanza follows stanza 7; many editions have made the transposition. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-3.xhtml#noteref-980" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-981" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Who <dfn>Saxi</dfn> may be is not clear, but the stanza clearly points to the time when the ordeal by boiling water was still regarded as a foreign institution, and when a southern king (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, a Christian from some earlier-converted region) was necessary to consecrate the kettle used in the test. The ordeal by boiling water followed closely the introduction of Christianity, which took place around the year 1000. Some editions make two stanzas out of stanza 7, and Müllenhoff contends that lines 1⁠–⁠2 do not constitute part of Guthrun’s speech. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-3.xhtml#noteref-981" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-982" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The word “requited” in line 4 is omitted in the manuscript, but it is clear that some such word was intended. The punishment of casting a culprit into a bog to be drowned was particularly reserved for women, and is not infrequently mentioned in the sagas. <a href="guthrunarkvitha-3.xhtml#noteref-982" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Oddrunargratr -->
				<li id="note-983" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nothing further is known of <dfn>Heithrek</dfn>, <dfn>Borgny</dfn> or <dfn>Vilmund</dfn>. The annotator has added the name of Borgny’s father, but otherwise his material comes from the poem itself. <dfn>Oddrun</dfn>, sister of Atli and Brynhild, here appears as proficient in birth-runes (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i>, 8). Regarding her love for <dfn>Gunnar</dfn>, Guthrun’s brother, and husband of her sister, Brynhild, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 57 and note. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-983" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-984" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Olden tales</dfn>: this may be merely a stock phrase, or it may really mean that the poet found his story in oral prose tradition. <dfn>Morningland</dfn>: the poem’s geography is utterly obscure. “Morningland” is apparently identical with “Hunland” (stanza 4), and yet Oddrun is herself sister of the king of the Huns. Vigfusson tries to make “Mornaland” into “Morva land” and explain it as Moravia. Probably it means little more than a country lying vaguely in the East. With stanza 28 the confusion grows worse. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-984" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-985" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 3 (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Völundarkvitha</i>, 17) or line 5 (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Thrymskvitha</i>, 2), both quoted from older poems, is probably spurious; the manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a new stanza. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-985" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-986" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 1 in the original appears to have lost its second half. In line 2 the word rendered “has happened” is doubtful. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker of lines 3⁠–⁠4, and a few editors assign them to Borgny herself. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-986" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-987" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speakers. <dfn>For the woman</dfn>: conjectural; the manuscript has instead:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“What warrior now</span>
								<span>hath worked this woe?”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 3 as beginning a new stanza. Line 5, apparently modeled on line 4 of stanza 13, is probably spurious. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-987" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-988" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Charms</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigrdrifumol</i>, 8. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-988" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-989" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hogni’s slayer</dfn>: obviously Vilmund, but unless he was the one of Atli’s followers who actually cut out Hogni’s heart (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Drap Niflunga</i>), there is nothing else to connect him with Hogni’s death. Sijmons emends the line to read</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Born of the sister</span>
								<span>of Hogni’s slayer.” <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-989" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-990" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Regarding <dfn>Frigg</dfn> as a goddess of healing <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Svipdagsmol</i>, 52, note. Regarding <dfn>Freyja</dfn> as the friend of lovers <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 14, note. A line is very possibly missing from this stanza. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-990" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-991" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name the speaker. In line 2 the word rendered “earn” is omitted in the manuscript, but nearly all editions have supplied it. Line 5 is clearly either interpolated or out of place. It may be all that is left of a stanza which stood between stanzas 15 and 16, or it may belong in stanza 12. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-991" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-992" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript the order is as follows: 12; 13; 14; 15, 3⁠–⁠4; 10; 11; 16; 17; 18; 19, 1⁠–⁠2; 15, 1⁠–⁠2; 19, 3⁠–⁠4; 20. The changes made here, following several of the editions, are: (a) the transposition of stanzas 10⁠–⁠11, which are clearly dialogue, out of the body of the lament to a position just before it; (b) the transposition of lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 15 to their present position from the middle of stanza 19. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-992" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-993" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name the speaker; <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanzas 10⁠–⁠20. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-993" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-994" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name the speaker; <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanzas 10⁠–⁠20. The word rendered “evil” in line 1 is a conjectural addition. Apparently Borgny was present at Atli’s court while the love affair between Oddrun and Gunnar was in progress, and criticised Oddrun for her part in it. <dfn>A draught</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: apparently in reference to a secret meeting of the lovers. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-994" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-995" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript this stanza follows stanza 9; <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanzas 10⁠–⁠20. No gap is indicated, but something has presumably been lost. Grundtvig supplies as a first line:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“The maid her evil</span>
								<span>days remembered,”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>and inserts as a second line line 5 of stanza 9. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-995" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-996" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a new stanza; many editions combine lines 1⁠–⁠2 with stanza 12 and lines 3⁠–⁠4 with lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 14. <dfn>The hero</dfn>: Buthli, father of Oddrun, Atli, and Brynhild. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-996" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-997" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 3, but not line 1, as the beginning of a new stanza; some editions combine lines 3⁠–⁠4 with lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 15. Making Buthli plan the marriage of Oddrun and Gunnar may be a sheer invention of the poet, or may point to an otherwise lost version of the legend. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-997" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-998" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 1⁠–⁠2 have here been transposed from the middle of stanza 19; <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanzas 10⁠–⁠20. <dfn>Wish-maid</dfn>: a Valkyrie, so called because the Valkyries fullfilled Othin’s wish in choosing the slain heroes for Valhall. The reference to Brynhild as a Valkyrie by no means fits with the version of the story used in stanzas 16⁠–⁠17, and the poet seems to have attempted to combine the two contradictory traditions; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>, note on stanza 44. In the manuscript stanzas 10⁠–⁠11 follow line 4 of stanza 15. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-998" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-999" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In stanzas 16⁠–⁠17 the underlying story seems to be the one used in <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i> (particularly stanzas 32⁠–⁠39), and referred to in <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 24, wherein Gunnar and Sigurth lay siege to Atli’s city (it here appears as Brynhild’s) and are bought off only by Atli’s giving Brynhild to Gunnar as wife, winning her consent thereto by falsely representing to her that Gunnar is Sigurth. This version is, of course, utterly at variance with the one in which Sigurth wins Brynhild for Gunnar by riding through the ring of flames, and is probably more closely akin to the early German traditions. In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="de">Nibelungenlied</i> Brynhild appears as a queen ruling over lands and peoples. <dfn>Fafnir’s slayer</dfn>: Sigurth. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-999" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1000" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> note on preceding stanza. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-1000" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1001" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, stanzas 64⁠–⁠70. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-1001" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1002" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 15 follow line 2, resulting in various conjectural combinations. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza. <dfn>Rings</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: possibly, as Gering maintains, payment offered by Gunnar and Hogni for Brynhild’s death, but more probably, as in stanza 20, Gunnar’s proffered “marriage gold” for the hand of Oddrun. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-1002" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1003" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Grani’s burden</dfn>: the treasure won by Sigurth from Fafnir; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>, concluding prose. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza, as also in stanzas 21 and 22. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-1003" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1004" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Murky wood</dfn>: the forest which divided Atli’s realm from that of the Gjukungs is in <i xml:lang="non">Atlakvitha</i>, 3, called Myrkwood. This hardly accords with the extraordinary geography of stanzas 28⁠–⁠29, or with the journey described in <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, 36. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-1004" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1005" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript lines 3 and 4 stand in reversed order. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-1005" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1006" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap is indicated in the manuscript; some editors assume the loss not only of two lines, but of an additional stanza. Evidently <dfn>Guthrun</dfn> has already become Atli’s wife. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-1006" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1007" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>If a stanza has been lost after stanza 25, it may well have told of Atli’s treacherous invitation to the Gjukungs to visit him; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Drap Niflunga</i>, which likewise tells of the slaying of <dfn>Hogni</dfn> and Gunnar (<dfn>the other</dfn>). <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-1007" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1008" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript these three lines follow line 2 of stanza 28. No gap is indicated in the manuscript. In the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> Guthrun gives her brother the harp, with which he puts the serpents to sleep. The episode is undoubtedly related to the famous thirtieth Aventiure of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="de">Nibelungenlied</i>, in which Volker plays the followers of Gunther to sleep before the final battle. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-1008" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1009" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript the three lines of stanza 27 follow line 2, and line 3 is marked as beginning a new stanza. <dfn>Geirmund</dfn>: nothing further is known of him, but he seems to be an ally or retainer of Atli, or possibly his brother. <dfn>Hlesey</dfn>: the poet’s geography is here in very bad shape. Hlesey is (or may be) the Danish island of Läsö, in the Kattegat (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Harbarthsljoth</i>, 37 and note), and thither he has suddenly transported not only Gunnar’s death-place but Atli’s whole dwelling (<abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 29), despite his previous references to the ride to Hunland (stanzas 3⁠–⁠4) and the “murky wood” (stanza 23). Geirmund’s home, where Oddrun has gone, is separated from Hlesey and Atli’s dwelling by a sound (stanza 29). However, geographical accuracy is seldom to be looked for in heroic epic poetry. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-1009" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1010" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many editions combine this stanza with lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 28. <dfn>The sound</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 28. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-1010" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1011" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza. <dfn>Atli’s mother</dfn>: the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> does not follow this version; Gunnar puts all the serpents but one to sleep with his harp playing, “but a mighty and evil adder crawled to him and drove his fangs into him till they reached his heart, and so he died.” It is possible that “Atli” is a scribal error for a word meaning “of serpents.” <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-1011" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1012" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Serpents’-bed goddess</dfn>: woman (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Borgny); “goddess of gold” was a frequent term for a woman, and gold was often called the “serpents’ bed” (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>, 24 and note). <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-1012" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1013" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions make line 4 a statement of the poet’s, and not part of Oddrun’s speech. <a href="oddrunargratr.xhtml#noteref-1013" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Atlakvitha en Grönlenzka -->
				<li id="note-1014" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the marriage of <dfn>Guthrun</dfn> to <dfn>Atli</dfn> at the instigation of her brothers, Gunnar and Hogni, and on the slaying of Atli and his two sons, Erp and Eitil, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Drap Niflunga</i> and note. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1014" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1015" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 1 apparently is in Fornyrthislag. <dfn>Knefröth</dfn> (the name is spelt in various ways, and its meaning is uncertain): in the <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i> (stanza 4) there are two messengers, one named Vingi and the other unnamed; the annotator combines the two versions in the <i xml:lang="non">Drap Niflunga</i>. <dfn>Benches</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: the adjective rendered “round the hearth,” which etymologically it ought to mean, is made obscure by its application to “helmets” in stanzas 3 and 17. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1015" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1016" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Falseness</dfn>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Gunnar’s followers concealed their fear and hatred of the Huns at the feast; but the word may mean “fear of treachery.” <dfn>War-hall</dfn>: the word used is “Valhall,” the name of Othin’s hall of slain warriors. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1016" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1017" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Myrkwood the secret</dfn> (the adjective is literally “unknown”): the forest which divided Atli’s realm from that of the Gjukungs; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Oddrunargratr</i>, 23 and note. <dfn>Around the hearth</dfn>: the adjective is the same one which is applied to “benches” in stanza 1 (<abbr>cf.</abbr> note); it may be an error here, or it may possibly have the force of “of your followers,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Gunnar is to arm the men of his household (those who are round his hearth) for the journey. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1017" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1018" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Slaves</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: some editions have “swords in plenty.” <dfn>Scarlet</dfn>: the word apparently means “slaughter-red,” “bloodred,” but it may mean something entirely different. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1018" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1019" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gnitaheith</dfn>: here the dragon Fafnir had his lair (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 11). Sigurth doubtless owned it after Fafnir’s death, and the Gjukungs after they had killed Sigurth. Possibly they had given it to Atli in recompense for the death of his sister, Brynhild, and he now offered to restore it to them, or⁠—as seems more likely⁠—the poet was not very clear about its ownership himself. <dfn>Stems</dfn>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, the gilded stems of ships, carved like dragons⁠—an evident northern touch, if the word is correct, which is by no means certain. <dfn>Danp</dfn>: this name was early applied to a mythical Danish king (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Rigsthula</i>, 49 and note), but it may have been fabricated by error out of the word “Danparstaþir” (the phrase here used is “<span xml:lang="non">staþi Danpar</span>”), used in the <i xml:lang="non">Hervararsaga</i> of a field of battle between the Goths and the Huns, and quite possibly referring to the region of the Dnieper. The name seems to have clung to the Atli tradition long after it had lost all definite significance. <dfn>Myrkwood</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 3. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1019" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1020" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The stanza is clearly in bad shape; the manuscript indicates line 5 as beginning a new stanza. In line 5 the manuscript has “and shield” after “helm.” <dfn>Kjar</dfn>: Gering ingeniously identifies this Kjar with Kjar the father of Olrun, mentioned in the <i xml:lang="non">Völundarkvitha</i>, introductory prose and stanza 2, on the basis of a genealogy in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="non">Flateyjarbok</i>, in which Authi, the grandfather of Kjar (by no means certainly the same man) and Buthli, father of Atli, are mentioned as making a raiding voyage together. This identification, however, rests on slight evidence. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1020" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1021" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name the speaker. One editor gives the first sentence to Gunnar. <dfn>She</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: Guthrun, seeking to warn her brothers of Atli’s treachery, sends them a ring with a wolf’s hair as a sign of danger; in the <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i> (stanza 4) she sends a message written in runes; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Drap Niflunga</i>. <dfn>Heath-dweller</dfn>: wolf. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1021" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1022" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In line 1 the manuscript has “His comrades did not urge Gunnar,” but the name, involving a metrical error, seems to have been inserted through a scribal blunder. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1022" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1023" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates no lacuna, but probably two lines have dropped out, for the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase runs: “Give us to drink in great cups, for it may well be that this shall be our last feast.” <dfn>Fjornir</dfn>: Gunnar’s cupbearer. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1023" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1024" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bugge thinks this stanza is spoken by Gunnar’s terrified followers; Grundtvig assigns it to Hogni. Apparently, however, Gunnar means that if he and his men are not valiant enough to make the journey and return safely, it matters little what may happen to them. <dfn>Niflungs</dfn>: regarding the application of this name to Gunnar’s Burgundians <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Brot</i>, 17 and note. <dfn>Bears</dfn>: these “black” bears have been used as arguments against the Greenland origin of the poem. <dfn>And make glad the dogs</dfn>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, by giving them corpses to eat, but the phrase in the original is more than doubtful. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1024" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1025" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions in line 2 read “home of the Niflungs” instead of “their home,” and others “home of the Huns,” the manuscript reading being “home of the men.” <dfn>Heir</dfn>: the <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i> (stanza 28) names two sons of Hogni, Snævar and Solar, both of whom make the journey with their father and are killed. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>, combining the two versions, says that Snævar and Solar went with their father, and implies that it was a third and still younger son who said: “Farewell, and have a good time” (thus literally). <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1025" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1026" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Myrkwood</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 3 and note; the journey is here made by land, whereas in the <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i> it is made partly by boat; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i>, 34 and note. <dfn>Whip-fearers</dfn>: horses, but there is some uncertainty as to the word. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1026" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1027" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In line 1 the manuscript has “land” instead of “halls,” which involves a metrical error. <dfn>Watch-towers</dfn>: the word used is identical with the name of Othin’s watchtower, Hlithskjolf (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, introductory prose). <dfn>Buthli</dfn>: the manuscript has “Bikki,” which has led some editors to transfer this stanza to the <i xml:lang="non">Hamthesmol</i>, placing it between stanzas 16 and 17; it seems more likely, however, that “Bikki” was a scribal error for “Buthli.” Regarding Bikki <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 63 and note. Line 4 is apparently in Fornyrthislag. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1027" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1028" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 1 in the manuscript is apparently incorrectly copied, and some editions omit “Mid weapons and lances” and assume a gap in either line 1 or line 3. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1028" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1029" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This may be the remains of two stanzas; the manuscript marks line 5 as beginning a new stanza. Editorial conjectures are numerous and varied. <dfn>Household</dfn>: the phrase is the same “helms round the hearth” commented on in stanza 3. Some editions insert a conjectural line after line 3. <dfn>Sword-norns</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: the line is exceedingly obscure, and the phrase rendered “sword-norns” may mean “corpse-norns.” Apparently it refers to the warrior-women of the Huns, the “shield-maids” of line 5 and of stanza 45. Roman writers refer to the warrior-women among the early Germanic tribes, and the tradition, closely allied to that of the Valkyries, attached itself readily to the ferocious Huns. <dfn>Den of snakes</dfn>: concerning the manner of Gunnar’s death <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Drap Niflunga</i>. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1029" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1030" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates no lacuna and does not name the speaker; perhaps a line similar to line 1 of stanza 24 (or 26) should be inserted here. <dfn>Rhine</dfn>: Gunnar’s Burgundian home is here clearly localized. After this stanza it is probable that a passage describing the battle has been lost. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1030" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1031" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These two lines, apparently the remains of a full stanza, may belong after stanza 20. <dfn>Burgundians’ king</dfn>: the phrase may mean “Burgundians’ men,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, they bound all the Burgundians who were left alive after the battle. This is the only place in the poems in which the name “Burgundian” appears; that the poet had no very clear conception of its meaning is indicated by the fact that in stanza 21 he calls Gunnar “king of the Goths.” <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1031" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1032" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apparently a Fornyrthislag stanza, though most editions have attempted to expand the lines into Malahattr. The exploits of Hogni (Hagene), with the names of many of his victims, are told in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="de">Nibelungenlied</i>. <dfn>The fire</dfn>: in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="de">Nibelungenlied</i> Kriemhild has the hall set on fire, and the Burgundians fight amid the flames. Line 4 is clearly defective, and some editors regard the name “Gunnar” as all that is left of the first two lines of stanza 21. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1032" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1033" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Again apparently the remains of a Fornyrthislag stanza. Editors have attempted various combinations of the lines. <dfn>Gold</dfn>: presumably Sigurth’s treasure. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1033" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1034" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speaker; perhaps a first line similar to line 1 of stanza 24 should appear here. Some editors, however, assume that a line is missing after line 3. Gunnar demands proof that Hogni is dead because, as stanza 28 shows, he is unwilling to die himself until he is assured that the secret of the treasure will perish with him. He did not, of course, intend that the heart should be cut from the living Hogni. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1034" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1035" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Most editions assume a gap (lines 1⁠–⁠2, 2⁠–⁠3 or 3⁠–⁠4). <dfn>Hjalli</dfn>: Atli’s cook, killed to deceive Gunnar, as Atli hoped to wring the secret of the hoard from Hogni if Gunnar remained silent. In the <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i> (stanzas 59⁠–⁠60) Atli’s men prepare to kill Hjalli, but he is spared at Hogni’s intercession. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1035" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1036" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Helm-hammerer</dfn> (literally “helmet-smith”): warrior, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Hogni. No gap indicated in the manuscript. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1036" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1037" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 1 may belong elsewhere (stanzas 18 or 22). <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1037" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1038" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apparently the remains of two Fornyrthislag lines; the manuscript combines them with lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 28. Gunnar foretells Atli’s speedy death. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1038" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1039" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apparently in Fornyrthislag. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, and many editions combine lines 3⁠–⁠4 with stanza 29. This stanza explains Gunnar’s demand for Hogni’s heart in stanza 22. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1039" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1040" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 3, and not line 1, as the beginning of a stanza. <dfn>Rhine</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: the stanza shows the blending of three different traditions with regard to the treasure: the German tradition of the gold of the Rhine (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Völundarkvitha</i>, 16, and <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 16), the tradition, likewise German, of the hoard of the Nibelungen (Niflungs), early blended with the first one, and finally the northern tradition of the theft of Andvari’s treasure by Othin, Hönir, and Loki (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i>, 1⁠–⁠9). <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1040" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1041" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apparently all that is left of a full stanza. The manuscript does not name Atli as the speaker, and Grundtvig inserts:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Then Atli called,</span>
								<span>the king of the Huns,”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>as a first line. Some editors combine this line with the two lines of stanza 33. <dfn>Wagon</dfn>: in <i xml:lang="non">Brot</i>, 16, Gunnar is led to his death in the serpents’ den on horseback, not in a wagon. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1041" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1042" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The stanza in the original is hopelessly confused. <dfn>Glaum</dfn>: this horse of Atli’s is mentioned by name elsewhere. <dfn>Long-maned</dfn>: uncertain. The manuscript indicates no gap, but something has evidently been lost. <dfn>Gods of slaughter</dfn>: perhaps the phrase, usually applied to Othin and the other gods, is here used simply to mean “heroes,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Atli, Gunnar, and Hogni. Line 4 suggests Guthrun’s tearlessness after Sigurth’s death (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, 11). <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1042" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1043" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speaker. <dfn>Sigtyr</dfn> (“Victory-God”): Othin; what particular mountain (if any) is meant is unknown. <dfn>Horse of the rest-bed</dfn>: probably this means “bedpost,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, the support of the marriage-bed. <dfn>Ull</dfn>: the archer-god, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Grimnismol</i>, 5 and note. Nothing is known of his ring. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1043" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1044" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apparently the remains of a Fornyrthislag stanza. Some editors combine the two lines with the line here indicated as stanza 30. <dfn>Champer of bits</dfn>: horse. The manuscript indicates no gap. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1044" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1045" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Six Fornyrthislag lines which editors have tried to reconstruct in all sorts of ways. The manuscript marks line 5 as the beginning of a new stanza. Regarding the serpents’ den, Gunnar’s harp-playing, and the manner of his death, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Drap Niflunga</i> and <i xml:lang="non">Oddrunargratr</i>, 27⁠–⁠30, and notes. In <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i>, 62, Gunnar plays the harp with his feet, his hands being bound, and some editors change <dfn>hand</dfn> in line 4 to “foot.” Lines 5⁠–⁠6 may be interpolated, or, as Bugge maintains, lines 1⁠–⁠4 may have been expanded out of two lines. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1045" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1046" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza. Two (possibly three) of the lines appear to be in Fornyrthislag. <dfn>Field</dfn>: so the manuscript, involving a metrical error; many editions have “wood.” <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1046" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1047" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Young beasts</dfn>: Guthrun means Atli’s sons, Erp and Eitil, but of course he thinks she refers to newly slaughtered beasts; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, 41⁠–⁠45. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1047" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1048" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Youths</dfn>: a conjectural addition. <dfn>The brave ones</dfn> is also conjectural, the manuscript having “each.” No gap indicated in the manuscript; some editions insert as line 3 or line 4 a slightly altered version of line 2 of stanza 45. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1048" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1049" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap indicated in the manuscript, but the two fragments cannot be fitted together as one line. <dfn>The shining one</dfn>: Guthrun. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1049" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1050" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Giver of swords</dfn>: generous prince, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Atli. <dfn>Honey</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, 42. <dfn>To send to thy followers</dfn>: literally, “to send from thy high seat.” <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1050" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1051" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apparently a Fornyrthislag stanza. <dfn>Merry with ale</dfn>: presumably this refers to Atli, but the manuscript reading makes it apply to the two boys. <dfn>Sharers of gold</dfn>: princes. Line 5 is either interpolated or all that is left of a separate stanza. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1051" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1052" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The text of the whole stanza has required a considerable amount of emendation. Lines 3⁠–⁠5 may have been expanded out of two lines, or line 5 may be an interpolation, possibly from stanza 12 of the <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarhvot</i>. <dfn>Weapons</dfn>: the word literally means “good-weaving,” and may refer to silken garments, but this hardly fits the noun here rendered “clashing.” <dfn>Wept not</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 31 and note. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1052" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1053" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 1 appears to be in Fornyrthislag. Guthrun distributes Atli’s treasures among his followers apparently to prevent their wrath at the slaying of Erp and Eitil from turning against her; Atli, as stanza 43 shows, is too drunk to realize or prevent what she is doing. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1053" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1054" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The second half of line 4 is apparently an error, but none of the editorial suggestions have improved it. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1054" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1055" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Guthrun allows the dogs and the house-thralls, who had no part in Gunnar’s death, to escape before she burns the dwelling with all who are left therein. In <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i>, stanzas 83⁠–⁠84, Atli is slain by a son of Hogni (Hniflung?) with Guthrun’s help. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1055" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1056" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions transfer line 2 to stanza 37; others reject line 3 as interpolated. <dfn>Myrkheim</dfn> (“Dark-Home”): probably identical with Myrkwood; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 3. <dfn>Temple</dfn>: probably both here and in stanza 42 the word means little more than the place where Atli’s treasures were kept; the poet was by no means literal in his use of terms connected with the heathen religion. <dfn>Buthlungs</dfn>: sons of Buthli, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Atli and his family. <dfn>Shield-maids</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 17 and note. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1056" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1057" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The entire stanza is very likely a later addition. <dfn>Three kings</dfn>: Atli and his two sons, Erp and Eitil. <a href="atlakvitha-en-gronlenzka.xhtml#noteref-1057" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Atlamol en Grönlenzku -->
				<li id="note-1058" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Men</dfn>: Atli and his advisers, with whom he planned the death of the sons of <dfn>Gjuki</dfn>, Gunnar and Hogni. The poet’s reference to the story as well known explains the abruptness of his introduction, without the mention of Atli’s name, and his reference to Guthrun in stanza 3 simply as “the woman” (“husfreyja,” goddess of the house). <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1058" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1059" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Princes</dfn>: Atli, Gunnar, and Hogni. <dfn>Bulwark</dfn>: Atli’s slaying of his wife’s brothers, who were ready to support and defend him in his greatness, was the cause of his own death. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1059" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1060" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The woman</dfn>: Guthrun, concerning whose marriage to Atli <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>. <dfn>The sea</dfn>: a late and essentially Greenland variation of the geography of the Atli story. Even the <i xml:lang="non">Atlakvitha</i>, perhaps half a century earlier, separates Atli’s land from that of the Gjukungs only by a forest. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1060" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1061" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Runes</dfn>: on the two versions of Guthrun’s warning, and also on the name of the messenger (here <dfn>Vingi</dfn>), <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Drap Niflunga</i> and note. <dfn>Limafjord</dfn>: probably the Limfjord of northern Jutland, an important point in the wars of the eleventh century. The name was derived from “Eylimafjǫrþ,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Eylimi’s fjord. The poet may really have thought that the kingdom of the Burgundians was in Jutland, or he may simply have taken a well-known name for the sake of vividness. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1061" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1062" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors assume a gap after this stanza. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1062" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1063" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions place this stanza between stanzas 7 and 8. <dfn>Kostbera</dfn> (“The Giver of Food”) and <dfn>Glaumvor</dfn> (“The Merry”): presumably creations of the poet. <dfn>Both</dfn>: Atli’s two emissaries, Vingi and the one here unnamed (Knefröth?). <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1063" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1064" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is altogether probable that a stanza has been lost between stanzas 6 and 7, in which Gunnar is first invited, and replies doubtfully. <dfn>Made promise</dfn>: many editions emend the text to read “promised the journey.” The text of line 4 is obscure; the manuscript reads “nitti” (“refused”), which many editors have changed to “hlitti,” which means exactly the opposite. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1064" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1065" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No gap is indicated in the manuscript; Bugge adds (line 3):</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Then the warriors rose,</span>
								<span>and to slumber made ready.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 4 as beginning a new stanza, and some editions make a separate stanza out of lines 1⁠–⁠2. Others suggest the loss of a line after line 4. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1065" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1066" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate line 1 as the beginning of a stanza; <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 8. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1066" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1067" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions combine this stanza with lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 11. The manuscript indicates no gap. Grundtvig adds (line 2):</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“But sleep to the woman</span>
								<span>so wise came little.” <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1067" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1068" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions make a separate stanza out of lines 1⁠–⁠2, or combine them with stanza 10, and combine lines 3⁠–⁠4 with stanza 12 (either lines 1⁠–⁠4 or 1⁠–⁠2). The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1068" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1069" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 5 may be spurious, or else all that is left of a lost stanza. The manuscript marks it as the beginning of a new stanza, which, as the text stands, is clearly impossible. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1069" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1070" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript, followed by some editions, has “Hogni spake” in the middle of line 1. <dfn>Ill</dfn>: the manuscript and many editions have “this.” <dfn>The king</dfn>: Atli. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1070" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1071" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speakers in this dialogue between Kostbera and Hogni (stanzas 14⁠–⁠19). Two lines may possibly have been lost after line 2, filling out stanza 14 and making stanza 15 (then consisting of lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 14 and lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 15) the account of Kostbera’s first dream. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza. In any case, the lost lines cannot materially have altered the meaning. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1071" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1072" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Saw I</dfn>: the manuscript here, as also in stanzas 16, 18, 21, 22, and 24, has “methought,” which involves a metrical error. Some editors regard lines 3⁠–⁠4 as the remains of a four-line stanza. Regarding Kostbera’s warning dreams, and Hogni’s matter-of-fact interpretations of them, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, 39⁠–⁠44. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1072" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1073" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The meaning of the first half of line 3 in the original is obscure. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1073" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1074" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Two lines may have been lost after line 2, but the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase gives no clue. <dfn>Ice-bear</dfn>: polar bears, common in Greenland, are very rarely found in Iceland, and never in Norway, a fact which substantiates the manuscript’s reference to Greenland as the home of the poem. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1074" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1075" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates no gap, but most editors assume the loss of a line after line 1 or 2; Grundtvig adds, after line 1:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Black were his feathers,</span>
								<span>with blood was he covered.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><dfn>Atli’s spirit</dfn>: the poet’s folklore seems here a bit weak. Presumably he means such a female following-spirit (“fylgja”) as appears in <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar</i>, prose following stanza 34 (<abbr>cf.</abbr> note thereon), but the word he uses, “hamr” (masculine) means “skin,” “shape.” He may, however, imply that Atli had assumed the shape of an eagle for this occasion. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1075" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1076" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 4 as beginning a new stanza. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1076" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1077" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates no gap, but none of the many attempted emendations have made sense out of the words as they stand. The proper location for the missing words is sheer guesswork. <dfn>Two roads</dfn>: probably the meaning is that their way (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, their success) would be doubtful. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1077" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1078" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speakers in this dialogue (stanzas 21⁠–⁠26). No gap is indicated after line 2. Most editors assume the loss of two lines or of a full stanza after stanza 21 giving Gunnar’s interpretation of Glaumvor’s dream, but the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> gives no clue, as it does not mention this first dream at all. Grundtvig suggests as Gunnar’s answer:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Banners are gleaming,</span>
								<span>since of gallows didst dream,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>And wealth it must mean</span>
								<span>that thou serpents didst watch.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><dfn>Gods’ doom</dfn>: an odd, and apparently mistaken, use of the phrase “ragna rök” (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, introductory note). <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1078" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1079" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Perhaps two lines have been lost after line 2. Possibly the concluding phrase of line 2 should be “bloody spears,” as in the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1079" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1080" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Again Gunnar’s interpretation is missing, and most editors either assume a gap or construct two Malahattr lines out of the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> prose paraphrase, which runs: “The grain shall flow, since thou hast dreamed of rivers, and when we go to the fields, often the chaff rises above our feet.” <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1080" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1081" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The meaning of line 4 is uncertain, but apparently it refers to the guardian spirits or lesser Norns (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Fafnismol</i>, 12⁠–⁠13 and notes). <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1081" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1082" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Possibly a line has been lost from this stanza. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1082" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1083" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Five</dfn>: Gunnar, Hogni, and the three mentioned in stanza 28. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1083" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1084" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Perhaps a line has been lost before line 1; Grundtvig supplies:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Gunnar and Hogni,</span>
								<span>the heirs twain of Gjuki.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><dfn>Snævar</dfn> (the manuscript here has “Snevar”), <dfn>Solar</dfn> and <dfn>Orkning</dfn> appear only in this poem and in the prose narratives based on it. Lines 2⁠–⁠3 may have been expanded out of one line, or possibly line 3 is spurious. The manuscript indicates line 4 as beginning a new stanza, and many editions make a separate stanza out of lines 4⁠–⁠5, many of them assuming the loss of two lines. <dfn>Shield-tree</dfn>: warrior (Orkning), here identified as Kostbera’s brother. <dfn>Fair-decked ones</dfn>: women, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Glaumvor and Kostbera. <dfn>Fjord</dfn>: perhaps specifically the <dfn>Limafjord</dfn> mentioned in stanza 4. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1084" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1085" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates no gap. Grundtvig inserts (line 2):</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“The evil was clear</span>
								<span>when his words he uttered.” <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1085" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1086" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Bera</dfn>: Kostbera; the first element in compound feminine proper names was not infrequently omitted; <abbr>cf.</abbr> Hild for Brynhild (<i xml:lang="non">Helreith Brynhildar</i>, 6). The manuscript indicates no gap; Grundtvig inserts (line 2):</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“And clear was her cry</span>
								<span>to her kinsmen dear.” <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1086" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1087" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hogni’s method of cheering his wife and sister-in-law is somewhat unusual, for the meaning of lines 3⁠–⁠4 is that good wishes and blessings are of little use in warding off danger. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1087" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1088" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Perhaps two lines have been lost after line 2; Grundtvig supplies:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Then weeping did Glaumvor</span>
								<span>go to her rest-bed,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>And sadly did Bera</span>
								<span>her spinning wheel seek.” <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1088" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1089" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Keel</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="de">Nibelungenlied</i>, and presumably in the older German tradition, Hagene breaks his oar steering the Burgundians across the Danube (stanza 1564), and, after all have landed, splinters the boat (stanza 1581) in order that there may be no retreating. The poet here seems to have confused the story, connecting the breaking of the ship’s keel with the violence of the rowing, but echoing the older legend in the last line, wherein the ship is allowed to drift away after the travellers have landed. <dfn>Oar-loops</dfn>: the thongs by which the oars in a Norse boat were made fast to the <dfn>thole-pins</dfn>, the combination taking the place of the modern oarlock. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1089" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1090" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 4 as beginning a new stanza, and many editions combine it with stanza 36, some of them assuming the loss of a line from stanza 35. In the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase the second half of line 4 is made a part of Vingi’s speech: “Better had ye left this undone.” <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1090" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1091" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> note on preceding stanza; the manuscript does not indicate line 1 as beginning a stanza. Line 3 may be spurious. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1091" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1092" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase the second half of line 1 and the first half of line 2 are included in Hogni’s speech. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1092" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1093" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Possibly two lines have been lost after line 2. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1093" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1094" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is probable that a considerable passage has been lost between stanzas 39 and 40, for the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase includes a dialogue at this point. The manuscript indicates no gap, and most editions combine stanzas 39 and 40 as a single stanza. The prose passage, indicating the substance of what, if anything, is lost, runs as follows: “ ‘Be welcome among us, and give me that store of gold which is ours by right, the gold that Sigurth had, and that now belongs to Guthrun.’ Gunnar said: ‘Never shalt thou get that gold, and men of might shalt thou find here, ere we give up our lives, if it is battle thou dost offer us; in truth it seems that thou hast prepared this feast in kingly fashion, and with little grudging toward eagle and wolf.’ ” The demand for the treasure likewise appears in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="de">Nibelungenlied</i>. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1094" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1095" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These two lines, which most editions combine with stanza 39, may be the first or last two of a four-line stanza. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> gives Atli’s speech very much as it appears here. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1095" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1096" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speaker; Grundtvig adds as a first line:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Then Hogni laughed loud</span>
								<span>where the slain Vingi lay.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Many editors assume the loss of a line somewhere in the stanza. <dfn>Unarmed</dfn>: Hogni does not see Atli’s armed followers, who are on the other side of the courtyard (stanza 39). <dfn>One</dfn>: Vingi. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1096" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1097" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Most editors assume the loss of one line, after either line 1 or line 3. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1097" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1098" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript reading of lines 1⁠–⁠2, involving a metrical error, is:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“In the house came the word</span>
								<span>of the warring without,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>Loud in front of the hall</span>
								<span>they heard a thrall shouting.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Some editors assume a gap of two lines after line 2, the missing passage giving the words of the thrall. The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, and many editions make a separate stanza of lines 3⁠–⁠5, some of them assuming the loss of a line after line 3. With the stanza as here given, line 5 may well be spurious. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1098" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1099" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Niflungs</dfn>: regarding the application of this term to the Burgundians <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Atlakvitha</i>, 11, and <i xml:lang="non">Brot</i>, 17, and notes. The manuscript here spells the name with an initial N, as elsewhere, but in stanza 83 the son of Hogni appears with the name “Hniflung.” In consequence, some editors change the form in this stanza to “Hniflungs,” while others omit the initial H in both cases. I have followed the manuscript, though admittedly its spelling is illogical. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1099" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The warlike deeds of Guthrun represent an odd transformation of the German tradition. Kriemhild, although she did no actual fighting in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="de">Nibelungenlied</i>, was famed from early times for her cruelty and fierceness of heart, and this seems to have inspired the poet of the <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i> to make his Guthrun into a warrior outdoing Brynhild herself. Kriemhild’s ferocity, of course, was directed against Gunther and especially Hagene, for whose slaying she rather than Etzel was responsible; here, on the other hand, Guthrun’s is devoted to the defense of her brothers. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 3 is very likely an interpolation. The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and some editions make a separate stanza of lines 4⁠–⁠5. <dfn>Atli’s brother</dfn>: doubtless a reminiscence of the early tradition represented in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="de">Nibelungenlied</i> by the slaying of Etzel’s brother, Blœdelin (the historical Bleda), by Dancwart. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 3 may well be spurious, for it implies that Gunnar and Hogni were killed in battle, whereas they were taken prisoners. Some editors, in an effort to smooth out the inconsistency, change “themselves” in this line to “sound.” Line 5 has also been questioned as possibly interpolated. <dfn>Niflungs</dfn>: on the spelling of this name in the manuscript and the various editions <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 44. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 2 is probably an interpolation, and the original apparently lacks a word. There is some obscurity as to the exact meaning of lines 4⁠–⁠5. <dfn>The two sons of Bera</dfn>: Snævar and Solar; <dfn>her brother</dfn> is Orkning; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 28. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The warrior</dfn>: Atli. <dfn>Thirty</dfn>: perhaps an echo of the “thirty warriors” of Thjothrek (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i>Guthrunarkvitha <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></i>, 5). Subtracting the eighteen killed by Snævar, Solar and Orkning (stanza 49), and Vingi, killed by the whole company (stanza 38), we have eleven left, as Atli says, but this does not allow much for the exploits of Gunnar and Hogni, who, by this reckoning, seem to have killed nobody. The explanation probably is that lines 4⁠–⁠5 of stanza 49 are in bad shape. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Five brothers</dfn>: the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> speaks of four (not five) sons of Buthli, but names only Atli. Regarding the death of the first two brothers <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 91 and note. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a stanza, and many editions combine lines 3⁠–⁠4 with stanza 52. Some insert lines 2⁠–⁠3 of stanza 52 ahead of lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 51. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Possibly a line has been lost from this stanza. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza, which is impossible unless something has been lost. <dfn>Gold</dfn>: the meaning of this half line is somewhat doubtful, but apparently Atli refers to Sigurth’s treasure, which should have been his as Brynhild’s brother. <dfn>Sister</dfn>: Brynhild; regarding Guthrun’s indirect responsibility for Brynhild’s death <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Gripisspo</i>, 45 and note. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name the speaker. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> gives the speech, in somewhat altered form, to Hogni: “Why speakest thou so? Thou wast the first to break peace; thou didst take my kinswoman and starved her in a prison, and murdered her and took her wealth; that was not kinglike; and laughable does it seem to me that thou talkest of thy sorrow, and good shall I find it that all goes ill with thee.” This presumably represents the correct form of the stanza, for nowhere else is it intimated that Atli killed Guthrun’s mother, Grimhild, nor is the niece elsewhere mentioned. Some editions make a separate stanza of lines 4⁠–⁠5, Grundtvig adding a line after line 3 and two more after line 5. Other editors are doubtful about the authenticity of either line 3 or line 5. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speaker. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The text of the first half of line 3 is somewhat uncertain, but the general meaning of it is clear enough. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Beiti</dfn>: not elsewhere mentioned. The <i xml:lang="non">Atlakvitha</i> version of this episode (stanzas 23⁠–⁠25) does not mention Beiti, and in the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> the advice to cut out Hjalli’s heart instead of Hogni’s is given by an unnamed “counsellor of Atli.” In the <i xml:lang="non">Atlakvitha</i> Hjalli is actually killed; the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> combines the two versions by having Hjalli first let off at Hogni’s intercession and then seized a second time and killed, thus introducing the <i xml:lang="non">Atlakvitha</i> episode of the quaking heart (stanza 24). The text of the first half of line 3 is obscure, and there are many and widely varying suggestions as to the word here rendered “sluggard.” <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions mark line 5 as probably interpolated. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Cook</dfn>: the original word is doubtful. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> does not paraphrase lines 3⁠–⁠5; the passage may be a later addition, and line 5 is almost certainly so. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is probable that a stanza describing the casting of Gunnar into the serpents’ den has been lost after this stanza. <dfn>Sons of day</dfn>: the phrase means no more than “men.” <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Regarding Gunnar’s harp-playing, and his death, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Oddrunargratr</i>, 27⁠–⁠30 and notes, and <i xml:lang="non">Atlakvitha</i>, 34. <dfn>Toes</dfn> (literally “sole-twigs”): the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> explains that Gunnar’s hands were bound. <dfn>Rafters</dfn>: thus literally, and probably correctly; Gering has an ingenious but unlikely theory that the word means “harp.” <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is some doubt as to the exact meaning of line 2. After this line two lines may have been lost; Grundtvig adds:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Few braver shall ever</span>
								<span>be found on the earth,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>Or loftier men</span>
								<span>in the world ever live.” <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Wise one</dfn>: Guthrun. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speaker. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name the speaker. The negative in the first half of line 1 is uncertain, and most editions make the clause read “Of this guilt I can free myself.” <dfn>The fairest</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, I have often failed to do the wise thing. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speaker. <dfn>Requital</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: it is not clear just to what Guthrun refers; perhaps she is thinking of Sigurth’s death, or possibly the poet had in mind his reference to the slaying of her mother in stanza 53. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 5 is very probably a later addition, though some editors question line 3 instead. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Guthrun suddenly changes her tone in order to make Atli believe that she is submissive to his will, and thus to gain time for her vengeance. Line 2 in the original is thoroughly obscure; it runs literally:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“On the knee goes the fist</span>
								<span>if the twigs are taken off.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Perhaps the word meaning “fist” may also have meant “treetop,” as Gering suggests, or perhaps the line is an illogical blending of the ideas contained in lines 1 and 3. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a new stanza. <dfn>Two shields</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Guthrun concealed her hostility (symbolized by a red shield, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Helgakvitha Hundingsbana</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, 34) by a show of friendliness (a white shield). <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many editions make a separate stanza of lines 1⁠–⁠2, some of them suggesting the loss of two lines, and combine lines 3⁠–⁠4 with lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 72. The manuscript marks both lines 1 and 3 as beginning stanzas. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza; some editions make a separate stanza of lines 3⁠–⁠5, while others combine them with lines 1⁠–⁠2 of stanza 73. Line 2 in the original is clearly defective, the verb being omitted. The meaning of line 3 is uncertain; the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase has: “At evening she took the sons of King Atli (Erp and Eitil) where they were playing with a block of wood.” Probably the text of the line as we have it is faulty. Lines 4⁠–⁠5 may possibly have been expanded out of a single line, or line 5 may be spurious. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name the speakers. It indicates line 3 as beginning a new stanza, in which it is followed by many editions. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrases line 4 thus: “But it is shameful for thee to do this.” Either the text of the line has been changed or the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> compilers misunderstood it. <dfn>The angry one</dfn>: Atli. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 3 as beginning a new stanza. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name the speaker. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Morning</dfn>: Guthrun refers to Atli’s taunt in stanza 64. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates no gap (lines 1⁠–⁠2), and most editions make a single line, despite the defective meter:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Thy sons hast thou lost</span>
								<span>as thou never shouldst lose them.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The second part of line 2 is in the original identical with the second half of line 3 of stanza 80, and may perhaps have been inserted here by mistake. <dfn>Skulls</dfn>: it is possible that line 3 was borrowed from a poem belonging to the Völund tradition (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Völundarkvitha</i>, 25 and 37), and the idea doubtless came from some such source, but probably the poet inserted it in a line of his own composition to give an added touch of horror. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> follows the <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i> in including this incident. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions add lines 3⁠–⁠4 to stanza 79; Finnur Jonsson marks them as probably spurious. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Perhaps these two lines should form part of stanza 78, or perhaps they, rather than lines 3⁠–⁠4 of stanza 78, are a later addition. A gap of two lines after line 1 has also been conjectured. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speaker. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speaker. Lines 1⁠–⁠2 may be the remains of a separate stanza; Grundtvig adds:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Thou wast foolish, Atli,</span>
								<span>when wise thou didst feel,</span>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<span>Ever the whole</span>
								<span>of thy race did I hate.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase, however, indicates no gap. Many editions make a separate stanza of lines 3⁠–⁠6, which, in the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>, are paraphrased as a speech of Atli’s. Lines 5⁠–⁠6 may be spurious. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speakers. Many editions make two separate stanzas of the four lines. <dfn>Another light</dfn>: a fairly clear indication of the influence of Christianity; <abbr>cf.</abbr> Introductory Note. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a new stanza. <dfn>Hniflung</dfn>: the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> says that “Hogni had a son who was called Hniflung,” but the name appears to be nothing more than the familiar “Niflung” applied in general to the sons of Gjuki and their people. On the spelling <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 44. This son of Hogni appears in later versions of the story. In the <i xml:lang="non">Thithrekssaga</i> he is called Aldrian, and is begotten by Hogni the night before his death. Aldrian grows up and finally shuts Attila in a cave where he starves to death. The poet here has incorporated the idea, which finds no parallel in the <i xml:lang="non">Atlakvitha</i>, without troubling himself to straighten out the chronology. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 4 may be in Fornyrthislag, and from another poem. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> makes line 2 part of Atli’s speech. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not name the speakers. It marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and many editions follow this arrangement, in most cases making a stanza of lines 4⁠–⁠5 and line 1 of stanza 87. However, line 1 may well have been interpolated here from stanza 75. Grundtvig adds after line 3:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“His father he avenged,</span>
								<span>and his kinsmen fully.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Some editors assume the loss of one or two lines after line 5. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 2 as beginning a new stanza, and some editions make a stanza out of lines 2⁠–⁠4 and line 1 of stanza 88. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 2 as the beginning of a stanza, and many editions make a stanza out of lines 2⁠–⁠4, or combine them with stanza 89. Some question the genuineness of line 4. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many editions assume a gap of one line after line 3; Grundtvig adds:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Bit-champing horses</span>
								<span>and wheel-wagons bright.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Line 4 may be spurious. <dfn>Greater</dfn>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, the silver which Atli gave Guthrun was of greater value even than the honor of receiving such royal gifts. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editions mark line 3 as spurious or defective. The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza. <dfn>The land</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: there is much obscurity as to the significance of this line. Some editors omit or question “me,” in which case Atli is apparently reproaching Guthrun for having incited him to fight with his brothers to win for himself the whole of Buthli’s land. In stanza 91 Guthrun denies that she was to blame for Atli’s quarrels with his brothers. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> reading supports this interpretation. The historical Attila did actually have his brother, Bleda, killed in order to have the sole rule. <dfn>The treasure</dfn>: Sigurth’s hoard, which Atli claimed as the brother of Brynhild and husband of Guthrun, Sigurth’s widow, but which Gunnar and Hogni kept for themselves, with, as Atli here charges, Guthrun’s connivance. <dfn>My mother</dfn>: the only other reference to Atli’s mother is in <i xml:lang="non">Oddrunargratr</i>, 30, wherein she appears as the adder who stings Gunnar to death, and in the prose passages based on that stanza. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speaker. It marks both lines 4 and 5 as beginning new stanzas, but line 5 is presumably an interpolation. The text of the second half of line 2 is obscure, and many emendations have been suggested. <dfn>Ye brothers</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 90. <dfn>Half</dfn>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, two of Atli’s brothers were killed, the other two dying in the battle with Gunnar and Hogni; <abbr>cf.</abbr> stanza 51. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>From the land</dfn>: this maritime expedition of Guthrun and her two brothers, Gunnar and Hogni (the poet seems to know nothing of her half-brother, Gotthorm), with Sigurth seems to have been a pure invention of the poet’s, inserted for the benefit of his Greenland hearers. Nothing further is reported concerning it. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The forest</dfn>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, men who were outlawed in the conquered land were restored to their rights⁠—another purely Norse touch. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hun-king</dfn>: Sigurth, though most illogically so called; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 4 and note. The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase of line 2 is so remote as to be puzzling: “It was little to bear the name of widow.” Perhaps, however, the word “not” fell out between “was” and “little.” <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Thing</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: here the poet makes Atli into a typical Norse landowner, going to the “Thing,” or general law council, to settle his disputes. Even the compilers of the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> could not accept this, and in their paraphrase changed “Thing” to “battle.” The text of the second half of line 2 is uncertain. The manuscript leaves a blank to indicate the gap in line 4; Grundtvig adds: “as beseems not a king.” <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate the speaker. Many editors assume a gap either before or after line 1. <dfn>A ship</dfn>: the burial of Norse chiefs in ships was of frequent occurrence, but the Greenland poet’s application of the custom to Atli is somewhat grotesque. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Heirs</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: merely a stock phrase, here quite meaningless, as Atli’s heirs had all been killed. <dfn>Long</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarhvot</i>, introductory prose. <a href="atlamol-en-gronlenzku.xhtml#noteref-1149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Guthrunarhvot -->
				<li id="note-1150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript the prose is headed “Of Guthrun,” the title “Guthrunarhvot” preceding stanza 1. The prose introduction is used both by Snorri (<i xml:lang="non">Skaldskaparmal</i>, chapter 42) and in the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>. It would be interesting to know on what the annotator based this note, for neither Bikki nor Randver is mentioned by name in either the <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarhvot</i> or the <i xml:lang="non">Hamthesmol</i>. On the prose notes in general, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Reginsmol</i>, introductory note. <dfn>Guthrun</dfn>: on the slaying of Atli by his wife, Guthrun, Sigurth’s widow, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i>, 83⁠–⁠86 and notes. <dfn>Jonak</dfn>: a Northern addition to the legend, introduced to account for Svanhild’s half-brothers; the name is apparently of Slavic origin. <dfn>Sorli</dfn>, <dfn>Erp</dfn>, and <dfn>Hamther</dfn>: Sorli and Hamther are the Sarus and Ammius of the Jordanes story (<abbr>cf.</abbr> introductory note). The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> follows this note in making Erp likewise a son of Guthrun, but in the <i xml:lang="non">Hamthesmol</i> he is a son of Jonak by another wife. <dfn>Svanhild</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 54 and note. <dfn>Jormunrek</dfn> (Ermanarich): <abbr>cf.</abbr> introductory note. <dfn>Bikki</dfn>: the Sifka or Sibicho of the Gothic legends of Ermanarich, whose evil counsel always brings trouble. <dfn>Randver</dfn>: in the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> Jormunrek sends his son Randver with Bikki to seek Svanhild’s hand. On the voyage home Bikki says to Randver: “It were right for you to have so fair a wife, and not such an old man.” Randver was much pleased with this advice, “and he spake to her with gladness, and she to him.” Thus the story becomes near of kin to those of Tristan and Iseult and Paolo and Francesca. According to the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>, Bikki told Ermanarich that a guilty love existed between his son and his young wife, and presumably the annotator here meant as much by his vague “this.” <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The poet’s introduction of himself in this stanza is a fairly certain indication of the relative lateness of the poem. <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Idle</dfn>: a guess; a word is obviously missing in the original. The manuscript marks line 5 as beginning a new stanza, and lines 5⁠–⁠6 may well have been inserted from another part of the “old” <i xml:lang="non">Hamthesmol</i> (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Hamthesmol</i>, 3). <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gunnar</dfn> and <dfn>Hogni</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Drap Niflunga</i>. Line 5 may be interpolated. <dfn>Hunnish</dfn>: here used, as often, merely as a generic term for all South Germanic peoples; the reference is to the Burgundian Gunnar and Hogni. <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Hamther</dfn>: some editions spell the name “Hamthir.” <dfn>Sigurth</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 21⁠–⁠24, and <i xml:lang="non">Brot</i>, concluding prose. This stanza has been subjected to many conjectural rearrangements, some editors adding two or three lines from the <i xml:lang="non">Hamthesmol</i>. <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Bloody</dfn>: a guess; a word in the original is clearly missing, and the same is true of <dfn>all</dfn> in line 3. <dfn>Thy sons</dfn>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, by killing her sons Erp and Eitil (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i>, 72⁠–⁠74) Guthrun deprived Hamther, Sorli, and the second Erp of valuable allies in avenging Svanhild’s death. <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates no gap, but most editors assume the loss of one, two or even more lines before the two here given. <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript indicates line 4 as beginning a new stanza. <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 1, identical with line 1 of stanza 4, may be interpolated here. <dfn>Spear-god</dfn>: warrior, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Hamther himself. With this stanza the introductory <dfn>hvot</dfn> (“inciting”) ends, and stanza 9 introduces the lament which forms the real body of the poem. <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 1 in the original is of uncertain meaning. Many editors assume the loss of a line after line 1, and some completely reconstruct line 1 on the basis of a hypothetical second line. <dfn>Princes</dfn>: Gunnar and Hogni. <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors assume the loss of one line, or more, before line 1. <dfn>Hniflungs</dfn>: Erp and Eitil, the sons of Guthrun and Atli. On the application of the name Niflung (or, as later spelt, Hniflung) to the descendants of Gjuki, Guthrun’s father, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Brot</i>, 17, note. <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Norns</dfn>: the fates; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Voluspo</i>, 8 and note. <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript omits the first half of line 4. <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors assume a gap of two lines after line 2, and make a separate stanza of lines 3⁠–⁠5; Gering adds a sixth line of his own coining, while Grundtvig inserts one between lines 3 and 4. The manuscript indicates line 5 as beginning a new stanza. <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate line 1 as beginning a stanza (<abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 16). Stanzas 17 and 18 are very likely later interpolations, although the compilers of the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> knew them as they stand here. The whole passage depends on the shades of difference in the meanings of the various superlatives: <dfn>harþastr</dfn>, “hardest”; <dfn>sárastr</dfn>, “sorest”; <dfn>grimmastr</dfn>, “grimmest,” and <dfn>hvassastr</dfn>, “keenest.” <dfn>Snakes</dfn>: <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Drap Niflunga</i>. <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>The king</dfn>: Hogni; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Atlakvitha</i>, 25. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza. Most editors agree that there is a more or less extensive gap after stanza 18, and some of them contend that the original ending of the poem is lost, stanzas 19⁠–⁠21 coming from a different poem, probably a lament closely following Sigurth’s death. <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate line 1 as beginning a stanza, and it immediately follows the fragmentary line 3 of stanza 18. The resemblance between stanzas 19⁠–⁠21 and stanzas 64⁠–⁠69 of <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i> suggests that, in some otherwise lost version of the story, Guthrun, like Brynhild, sought to die soon after Sigurth’s death. <dfn>Thy steed</dfn>: Guthrun’s appeal to the dead Sigurth to ride back to earth to meet her is reminiscent of the episode related in <i>Helgakvitha Hundingsbana <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, 39⁠–⁠48. The promise mentioned in stanza 20 is spoken of elsewhere only in the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase of this passage. <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Perhaps something has been lost between stanzas 20 and 21, or possibly stanza 21, while belonging originally to the same poem as stanzas 19 and 20, did not directly follow them. <dfn>Sore-pressed</dfn>: a guess; a word seems to have been omitted in the original. <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Words of the poet’s, like stanza 1, and perhaps constituting a later addition. Many editors assume the loss of a line after line 3. The meaning, of course, is that the poet hopes the story of Guthrun’s woes will make all other troubles seem light by comparison. <a href="guthrunarhvot.xhtml#noteref-1168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!-- Hamthesmol -->
				<li id="note-1169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This stanza looks like a later interpolation from a totally unrelated source. <dfn>Sorrow of elves</dfn>: the sun; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Alvissmol</i>, 16 and note. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors regard lines 1⁠–⁠2 as interpolated, while others question line 3. <dfn>Guthrun</dfn>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: regarding the marriage of Jonak and Guthrun (daughter of Gjuki, sister of Gunnar and Hogni, and widow first of Sigurth and then of Atli), and the sons of this marriage, Hamther and Sorli (but not Erp), <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarhvot</i>, introductory prose and note. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Svanhild</dfn> and <dfn>Jormunrek</dfn>: regarding the manner in which Jormunrek (Ermanarich) married Svanhild, daughter of Sigurth and Guthrun, and afterwards had her trodden to death by horses, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarhvot</i>, introductory note. Lines 3⁠–⁠4 are identical with lines 5⁠–⁠6 of <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarhvot</i>, 2. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These two lines may be all that is left of a four-line stanza. The manuscript and many editions combine them with stanza 5, while a few place them after stanza 5 as a separate stanza, reversing the order of the two lines. <dfn>Kings of the folk</dfn>: Guthrun’s brothers, Gunnar and Hogni, slain by Atli. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> note on stanza 4; the manuscript does not indicate line 1 as beginning a stanza. <dfn>Scather of twigs</dfn>: poetic circumlocution for the wind (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Skaldskaparmal</i>, chapter 27), though some editors think the phrase here means the sun. Some editors assume a more or less extensive gap between stanzas 5 and 6. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 1⁠–⁠3 are nearly identical with lines 1⁠–⁠3 of <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarhvot</i>, 4. On the death of <dfn>Sigurth</dfn> <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 21⁠–⁠24, and <i xml:lang="non">Brot</i>, concluding prose. The word <dfn>thy</dfn> in line 3 is omitted in the original. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lines 1⁠–⁠2 are nearly identical with lines 4⁠–⁠5 of <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarhvot</i>, 4. The manuscript, followed by many editions, indicates line 3 and not line 1 as beginning a stanza. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors regard this stanza as interpolated. <dfn>Erp</dfn> and <dfn>Eitil</dfn>: regarding Guthrun’s slaying of her sons by Atli, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Atlamol</i>, 72⁠–⁠75. The Erp here referred to is not to be confused with the Erp, son of Jonak, who appears in stanza 13. The whole of stanza 8 is in doubtful shape, and many emendations have been suggested. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors assign this speech to Hamther. <dfn>Brothers</dfn>: Gunnar and Hogni. <dfn>Boys</dfn>: Erp and Eitil. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript this stanza follows stanza 21, and some editors take the word here rendered “fame-glad one” (hróþrglǫþ) to be a proper name (Jormunrek’s mother or his concubine). The <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>, however, indicates that Guthrun at this point “had so fashioned their war-gear that iron would not bite into it, and she bade them to have nought to do with stones or other heavy things, and told them that it would be ill for them if they did not do as she said.” The substance of this counsel may well have been conveyed in a passage lost after line 3, though the manuscript indicates no gap. It is by being stoned that Hamther and Sorli are killed (stanza 26). On the other hand, the second part of line 3 may possibly mean “if silent ye are not,” in which case the advice relates to Hamther’s speech to Jormunrek and Sorli’s reproach to him thereupon (stanzas 25 and 27). <dfn>Steps</dfn>: the word in the original is doubtful. Line 3 is thoroughly obscure. Some editors make a separate stanza of lines 3⁠–⁠5, while others question line 5. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many editors assume the loss of a line after line 1. In several editions lines 2⁠–⁠3 are placed after line 2 of stanza 18. <dfn>Hunnish</dfn>: the word meant little more than “German”; <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarhvot</i>, 3 and note. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript these two lines follow stanza 16; some editors insert them in place of lines 2⁠–⁠3 of stanza 11. The manuscript indicates no gap. <dfn>The man so wise</dfn>: Erp, here represented as a son of Jonak but not of Guthrun, and hence a half-brother of Hamther and Sorli. There is nothing further to indicate whether or not he was born out of wedlock, as intimated in stanza 16. Some editors assign line 3 to Hamther, and some to Sorli. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The stanza is obviously defective. Many editors add Erp’s name in line 1, and insert between lines 2 and 3 a line based on stanza 15 and the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“As a flesh-grown hand</span>
								<span>another helps.”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>In the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>, after Erp’s death, Hamther stumbles and saves himself from falling with his hand, whereupon he says: “Erp spake truly; I had fallen had I not braced myself with my hand.” Soon thereafter Sorli has a like experience, one foot slipping but the other saving him from a fall. “Then they said that they had done ill to Erp, their brother.” <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many editions attach these two lines to stanza 14, while a few assume the loss of two lines. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript this stanza stands between stanzas 12 and 13. Some editors make line 4 a part of Erp’s speech. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript does not indicate line 1 as beginning a stanza. <dfn>The giantess</dfn>: presumably the reference is to Hel, goddess of the dead, but the phrase is doubtful. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript these two lines are followed by stanza 19 with no indication of a break. Some editions insert here lines 2⁠–⁠3 of stanza 12, while others assume the loss of two or more lines. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> note on stanza 18. <dfn>Ill way</dfn>: very likely the road leading through the gate of Jormunrek’s town at which Svanhild was trampled to death. <dfn>Sister’s son</dfn>: many editors change the text to read “stepson,” for the reference is certainly to Randver, son of Jormunrek, hanged by his father on Bikki’s advice (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarhvot</i>, introductory note). <dfn>Wolf-tree</dfn>: the gallows, the wolf being symbolical of outlaws. <dfn>Cranes’-bait</dfn>: presumably either snakes or worms, but the passage is doubtful. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many editors assume the loss of a line after line 3. <dfn>The warrior</dfn>: presumably a warder or watchman, but the reference may be to Hamther himself. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The word here rendered <dfn>men</dfn> (line 1) is missing in the original, involving a metrical error, and various words have been suggested. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Line 2 in the original is thoroughly obscure; some editors directly reverse the meaning here indicated by giving the line a negative force, while others completely alter the phrase rendered “his arms he called for” into one meaning “he stroked his cheeks.” <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><dfn>Gjuki’s heirs</dfn>: the original has “the wellborn of Gjuki,” and some editors have changed the proper name to Guthrun, but the phrase apparently refers to Hamther and Sorli as Gjuki’s grandsons. In the manuscript this stanza is followed by stanza 11, and such editors as have retained this arrangement have had to resort to varied and complex explanations to account for it. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Editors have made various efforts to reconstruct a four-line stanza out of these two lines, in some cases with the help of lines borrowed from the puzzling stanza 11 (<abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 23). Line 2 in the original is doubtful. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors mark line 1 as an interpolation. The manuscript marks line 4 as beginning a new stanza. As in the story told by Jordanes, Hamther and Sorli succeed in wounding Jormunrek (here they cut off his hands and feet), but do not kill him. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The manuscript marks line 3, and not line 1, as beginning a stanza. <dfn>Of the race of the gods</dfn>: the reference here is apparently to Jormunrek, but in the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i> the advice to kill Hamther and Sorli with stones, since iron will not wound them (<abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 11), comes from Othin, who enters the hall as an old man with one eye. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the manuscript this stanza is introduced by the same line as stanza 25:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>
								<span>“Then did Hamther speak forth,</span>
								<span>the haughty of heart,”</span>
							</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>but the speaker in this case must be Sorli and not Hamther. Some editors, however, give lines 1⁠–⁠2 to Hamther and lines 3⁠–⁠4 to Sorli. <dfn>Bag</dfn>: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, Hamther’s mouth; <abbr>cf.</abbr> note on stanza 11. The manuscript indicates line 3 as beginning a new stanza. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Most editors regard stanzas 28⁠–⁠30 as a speech by Hamther, but the manuscript does not indicate the speaker, and some editors assign one or two of the stanzas to Sorli. Lines 1⁠–⁠2 are quoted in the <i xml:lang="non">Volsungasaga</i>. The manuscript does not indicate line 1 as beginning a stanza. <dfn>Erp</dfn>: Hamther means that while the two brothers had succeeded only in wounding Jormunrek, Erp, if he had been with them, would have killed him. Lines 3⁠–⁠4 may be a later interpolation. <dfn>Norns</dfn>: the fates; the word used in the original means the goddesses of ill fortune. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is almost certainly an interpolated Ljothahattr stanza, though some editors have tried to expand it into the Fornyrthislag form. <dfn>Hounds of the Norns</dfn>: wolves. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some editors assume a gap after this stanza. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apparently a fragment of a stanza from the “old” <i xml:lang="non">Hamthesmol</i> to which the annotator’s concluding prose note refers. Some editors assume the loss of two lines after line 2. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Regarding the “old” <i xml:lang="non">Hamthesmol</i>, <abbr>cf.</abbr> <i xml:lang="non">Guthrunarhvot</i>, introductory note. <a href="hamthesmol.xhtml#noteref-1199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
