<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 class="main">FAFNISMOL</h2>
			<h2 class="sub">
				<i>The Ballad of Fafnir</i>
			</h2>
			<div class="divBody">
				<div class="div2 introNote section">
					
					<div class="divHead">
						<h3 class="main">
							<span class="sc">Introductory Note</span>
						</h3>
					</div>
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first">The so-called <i>Fafnismol</i>, contained in full in the <i lang="la">Codex Regius</i>, where it immediately follows the <i>Reginsmol</i> without any indication of a break, is quoted by Snorri in the <i>Gylfaginning</i> (stanza 13) and the <i>Skaldskaparmal</i> (stanzas 32 and 33), and stanzas 6, 3, and 4 appear in the <i>Sverrissaga</i>. Although the <i>Volsungasaga</i> does not actually quote any of the stanzas, it gives a very close prose parallel to the whole poem in chapters 18 and 19.</p>
						<p>The general character of the <i>Fafnismol</i>, and its probable relation to the <i>Reginsmol</i> and the <i>Sigrdrifumol</i>, have been discussed in the introductory note to the <i>Reginsmol</i>. While it is far more nearly a unit than the <i>Reginsmol</i>, it shows many of the same characteristics. It has the same mixture of stanza forms, although in this case only nine stanzas (32–33, 35–36 and 40–44) vary from the normal Ljothahattr measure. It shows, though to a much less marked extent, the same tendency to introduce passages from extraneous sources, such as the question-and-answer passage in stanzas 11–15. At the same time, in this instance it is quite clear that one distinct poem, including probably stanzas 1–10, 16–23, 25–31, and 34–39, underlay the compilation which we here have. This may, perhaps, have been a long poem (not, however, the “Long” Sigurth Lay; see introductory note to <i>Brot af Sigurtharkvithu</i>) dealing with the Regin-Fafnir-Sigurth-Brynhild story, and including, besides most of the <i>Fafnismol</i>, stanzas 1–4 and 6–11 of the <i>Reginsmol</i> and part of the so-called <i>Sigrdrifumol</i>, together with much that has been lost. The original poem may, on the other hand, have confined itself to the Fafnir episode.</p>
						<p>In any case, and while the extant <i>Fafnismol</i> can be spoken of as a distinct poem far more justly than the <i>Reginsmol</i>, there is still no indication that the compiler regarded it as a poem by itself. His prose notes run on without a break, and the verses simply cover a dramatic episode in Sigurth’s early life. The fact that the work of compilation has been done more intelligently than in the case of the <i>Reginsmol</i> seems to have resulted chiefly from the compiler’s having been familiar with longer consecutive verse passages dealing with the Fafnir episode. The <i>Reginsmol</i> is little more than a clumsy mosaic, but in the <i>Fafnismol</i> it is possible to distinguish between the main substance of the poem and the interpolations.</p>
						<p>Here, as in the <i>Reginsmol</i>, there is very little that bespeaks the German origin of the Sigurth story. Sigurth’s winning of the treasure is in itself undoubtedly a part of the earlier southern legend, but the manner in which he does it is thoroughly Norse. Moreover, the concluding section, which points toward the finding of the sleeping Brynhild, relates entirely to the northern Valkyrie, the warrior-maiden punished by Othin, and not at all to the southern Brynhild the daughter of Buthli. The <i>Fafnismol</i> is, however, sharply distinguished from the <i>Reginsmol</i> by showing no clear traces of the Helgi tradition, although a part of the bird song (stanzas 40–44, in Fornyrthislag form, as distinct from the body of the poem) sounds suspiciously like the bird passage in the beginning of the <i>Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar</i>. Regarding the general relations of the various sets of traditions in shaping the story of Sigurth, see the introductory note to <i>Gripisspo</i>.</p>
						<p>The <i>Fafnismol</i>, together with a part of the <i>Sigrdrifumol</i>, has indirectly become the best known of all the Eddic poems, for the reason that Wagner used it, with remarkably little change of outline, as the basis for his “Siegfried.”</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="div2 section">
					
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first" id="prose2.8">Sigurth and Regin went up to the Gnitaheith, and found there the track that Fafnir made when he crawled to water. Then Sigurth made a great trench across the path, and took his place therein. When Fafnir crawled from his gold, he blew out venom, and it ran down from above on Sigurth’s head. But when Fafnir crawled over the trench, then Sigurth thrust his sword into his body to the heart. Fafnir writhed and struck out with his head and tail. Sigurth leaped from the trench, and each looked at the other. Fafnir said:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.1">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.1">1</a>.</span> “Youth, oh, youth!   |   of whom then, youth, art thou born?</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Say whose son thou art,</p>
							<p class="line">Who in Fafnir’s blood   |   thy bright blade reddened,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And struck thy sword to my heart.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first">Sigurth concealed his name because it was believed in olden times that the word of a dying man might have great power if he cursed his foe by his name. He said:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>2</a>.</span> “The Noble Hart   |   my name, and I go</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A motherless man abroad;</p>
							<p class="line">Father I had not,   |   as others have,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And lonely ever I live.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Fafnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.3">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.3">3</a>.</span> “If father thou hadst not,   |   as others have,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">By what wonder wast thou born?</p>
							<p class="line">(Though thy name on the day   |   of my death thou hidest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thou knowest now thou dost lie.)”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Sigurth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.4">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.4">4</a>.</span> “My race, methinks,   |   is unknown to thee,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And so am I myself;</p>
							<p class="line">Sigurth my name,   |   and Sigmund’s son,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Who smote thee thus with the sword.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fafnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.5">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.5">5</a>.</span> “Who drove thee on?   |   why wert thou driven</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">My life to make me lose?</p>
							<p class="line">A father brave   |   had the bright-eyed youth,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For bold in boyhood thou art.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Sigurth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>6</a>.</span> “My heart did drive me,   |   my hand fulfilled,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And my shining sword so sharp;</p>
							<p class="line">Few are keen   |   when old age comes,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Who timid in boyhood be.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Fafnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.7">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.7">7</a>.</span> “If thou mightest grow   |   thy friends among,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">One might see thee fiercely fight;</p>
							<p class="line">But bound thou art,   |   and in battle taken,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And to fear are prisoners prone.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Sigurth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>8</a>.</span> “Thou blamest me, Fafnir,   |   that I see from afar</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The wealth that my father’s was;</p>
							<p class="line">Not bound am I,   |   though in battle taken,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thou hast found that free I live.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fafnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>9</a>.</span> “In all I say   |   dost thou hatred see,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Yet truth alone do I tell;</p>
							<p class="line">The sounding gold,   |   the glow-red wealth,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the rings thy bane shall be.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Sigurth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>10</a>.</span> “Some one the hoard   |   shall ever hold,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Till the destined day shall come;</p>
							<p class="line">For a time there is   |   when every man</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Shall journey hence to hell.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fafnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.11">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.11">11</a>.</span> “The fate of the Norns   |   before the headland</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thou findest, and doom of a fool;</p>
							<p class="line">In the water shalt drown   |   if thou row ’gainst the wind,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">All danger is near to death.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Sigurth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.12">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.12">12</a>.</span> “Tell me then, Fafnir,   |   for wise thou art famed,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And much thou knowest now:</p>
							<p class="line">Who are the Norns   |   who are helpful in need,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the babe from the mother bring?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fafnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.13">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.13">13</a>.</span> “Of many births   |   the Norns must be,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Nor one in race they were;</p>
							<p class="line">Some to gods, others   |   to elves are kin,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And Dvalin’s daughters some.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Sigurth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.14">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.14">14</a>.</span> “Tell me then, Fafnir,   |   for wise thou art famed,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And much thou knowest now:</p>
							<p class="line">How call they the isle   |   where all the gods</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And Surt shall sword-sweat mingle?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fafnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.15">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.15">15</a>.</span> “Oskopnir is it,   |   where all the gods</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Shall seek the play of swords;</p>
							<p class="line">Bilrost breaks   |   when they cross the bridge,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the steeds shall swim in the flood.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.16">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.16">16</a>.</span> “The fear-helm I wore   |   to afright mankind,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">While guarding my gold I lay;</p>
							<p class="line">Mightier seemed I   |   than any man,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For a fiercer never I found.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Sigurth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>17</a>.</span> “The fear-helm surely   |   no man shields</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When he faces a valiant foe;</p>
							<p class="line">Oft one finds,   |   when the foe he meets,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That he is not the bravest of all.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fafnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.18">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.18">18</a>.</span> “Venom I breathed   |   when bright I lay</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">By the hoard my father had;</p>
							<p class="line">(There was none so mighty   |   as dared to meet me,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And weapons nor wiles I feared.)”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Sigurth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>19</a>.</span> “Glittering worm,   |   thy hissing was great,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And hard didst show thy heart;</p>
							<p class="line">But hatred more   |   have the sons of men</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For him who owns the helm.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fafnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.20">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.20">20</a>.</span> “I counsel thee, Sigurth,   |   heed my speech,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And ride thou homeward hence;</p>
							<p class="line">The sounding gold,   |   the glow-red wealth,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the rings thy bane shall be.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Sigurth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>21</a>.</span> “Thy counsel is given,   |   but go I shall</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To the gold in the heather hidden;</p>
							<p class="line">And, Fafnir, thou   |   with death dost fight,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Lying where Hel shall have thee.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fafnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.22">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.22">22</a>.</span> “Regin betrayed me,   |   and thee will betray,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Us both to death will he bring;</p>
							<p class="line">His life, methinks,   |   must Fafnir lose,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For the mightier man wast thou.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first">Regin had gone to a distance while Sigurth fought Fafnir, and came back while Sigurth was wiping the blood from his sword. Regin said:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>23</a>.</span> “Hail to thee, Sigurth!   |   Thou victory hast,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And Fafnir in fight hast slain;</p>
							<p class="line">Of all the men   |   who tread the earth,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Most fearless art thou, methinks.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Sigurth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.24">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.24">24</a>.</span> “Unknown it is,   |   when all are together,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">(The sons of the glorious gods,)</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Who bravest born shall seem;</p>
							<p class="line">Some are valiant   |   who redden no sword</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">In the blood of a foeman’s breast.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Regin spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.25">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.25">25</a>.</span> “Glad art thou, Sigurth,   |   of battle gained,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">As Gram with grass thou cleansest;</p>
							<p class="line">My brother fierce   |   in fight hast slain,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And somewhat I did myself.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Sigurth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.26">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.26">26</a>.</span> “Afar didst thou go   |   while Fafnir reddened</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">With his blood my blade so keen;</p>
							<p class="line">With the might of the dragon   |   my strength I matched,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">While thou in the heather didst hide.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Regin spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>27</a>.</span> “Longer wouldst thou   |   in the heather have let</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Yon hoary giant hide,</p>
							<p class="line">Had the weapon availed not   |   that once I forged,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The keen-edged blade thou didst bear.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Sigurth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.28">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.28">28</a>.</span> “Better is heart   |   than a mighty blade</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For him who shall fiercely fight;</p>
							<p class="line">The brave man well   |   shall fight and win,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Though dull his blade may be.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>29</a>.</span> “Brave men better   |   than cowards be,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When the clash of battle comes;</p>
							<p class="line">And better the glad   |   than the gloomy man</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Shall face what before him lies.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.30">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.30">30</a>.</span> “Thy rede it was   |   that I should ride</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Hither o’er mountains high;</p>
							<p class="line">The glittering worm   |   would have wealth and life</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If thou hadst not mocked at my might.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first" id="prose2.8.30">Then Regin went up to Fafnir and cut out his heart with his sword, that was named Rithil, and then he drank blood from the wounds. Regin said:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>31</a>.</span> “Sit now, Sigurth,   |   for sleep will I,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Hold Fafnir’s heart to the fire;</p>
							<p class="line">For all his heart   |   shall eaten be,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Since deep of blood I have drunk.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first">Sigurth took Fafnir’s heart and cooked it on a spit. When he thought that it was fully cooked, and the blood foamed out of the heart, then he tried it with his finger to see whether it was fully cooked. He burned his finger, and put it in his mouth. But when Fafnir’s heart’s-blood came on his tongue, he understood the speech of birds. He heard nut-hatches chattering in the thickets. A nut-hatch said:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.32">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.32">32</a>.</span> “There sits Sigurth,   |   sprinkled with blood,</p>
							<p class="line">And Fafnir’s heart   |   with fire he cooks;</p>
							<p class="line">Wise were the breaker   |   of rings, I ween,</p>
							<p class="line">To eat the life-muscles   |   all so bright.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>A second spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>33</a>.</span> “There Regin lies,   |   and plans he lays</p>
							<p class="line">The youth to betray   |   who trusts him well;</p>
							<p class="line">Lying words   |   with wiles will he speak,</p>
							<p class="line">Till his brother the maker   |   of mischief avenges.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>A third spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.34">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.34">34</a>.</span> “Less by a head   |   let the chatterer hoary</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Go from here to hell;</p>
							<p class="line">Then all of the wealth   |   he alone can wield,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The gold that Fafnir guarded.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>A fourth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.35">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.35">35</a>.</span> “Wise would he seem   |   if so he would heed</p>
							<p class="line">The counsel good   |   we sisters give;</p>
							<p class="line">Thought he would give,   |   and the ravens gladden,</p>
							<p class="line">There is ever a wolf   |   where his ears I spy.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>A fifth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.36">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.36">36</a>.</span> “Less wise must be   |   the tree of battle</p>
							<p class="line">Than to me would seem   |   the leader of men,</p>
							<p class="line">If forth he lets   |   one brother fare,</p>
							<p class="line">When he of the other   |   the slayer is.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>A sixth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.37">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.37">37</a>.</span> “Most foolish he seems   |   if he shall spare</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">His foe, the bane of the folk;</p>
							<p class="line">There Regin lies,   |   who hath wronged him so,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Yet falsehood knows he not.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>A seventh spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.38">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.38">38</a>.</span> “Let the head from the frost-cold   |   giant be hewed,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And let him of rings be robbed;</p>
							<p class="line">Then all the wealth   |   which Fafnir’s was</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Shall belong to thee alone.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Sigurth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>39</a>.</span> “Not so rich a fate   |   shall Regin have</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">As the tale of my death to tell;</p>
							<p class="line">For soon the brothers   |   both shall die,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And hence to hell shall go.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first">Sigurth hewed off Regin’s head, and then he ate Fafnir’s heart, and drank the blood of both Regin and Fafnir. Then Sigurth heard what the nut-hatch said:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.40">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.40">40</a>.</span> “Bind, Sigurth, the golden   |   rings together,</p>
							<p class="line">Not kingly is it   |   aught to fear;</p>
							<p class="line">I know a maid,   |   there is none so fair,</p>
							<p class="line">Rich in gold,   |   if thou mightest get her.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.41">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.41">41</a>.</span> “Green the paths   |   that to Gjuki lead,</p>
							<p class="line">And his fate the way   |   to the wanderer shows;</p>
							<p class="line">The doughty king   |   a daughter has,</p>
							<p class="line">That thou as a bride   |   mayst, Sigurth, buy.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Another spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.42">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.42">42</a>.</span> “A hall stands high   |   on Hindarfjoll,</p>
							<p class="line">All with flame   |   is it ringed without;</p>
							<p class="line">Warriors wise   |   did make it once</p>
							<p class="line">Out of the flaming   |   light of the flood.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.43">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.43">43</a>.</span> “On the mountain sleeps   |   a battle-maid,</p>
							<p class="line">And about her plays   |   the bane of the wood;</p>
							<p class="line">Ygg with the thorn   |   hath smitten her thus,</p>
							<p class="line">For she felled the fighter   |   he fain would save.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.8.44">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.8.44">44</a>.</span> “There mayst thou behold   |   the maiden helmed,</p>
							<p class="line">Who forth on Vingskornir   |   rode from the fight;</p>
							<p class="line">The victory-bringer   |   her sleep shall break not,</p>
							<p class="line">Thou heroes’ son,   |   so the Norns have set.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first" id="prose2.8.44">Sigurth rode along Fafnir’s trail to his lair, and found it open. The gate-posts were of iron, and the gates; of iron, too, were all the beams in the house, which was dug down into the earth. There Sigurth found a mighty store of gold, and he filled two chests full thereof; he took the fear-helm and a golden mail-coat and the sword Hrotti, and many other precious things, and loaded Grani with them, but the horse would not go forward until Sigurth mounted on his back.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="div2 endNotes last-child section">
					
					<div class="divHead">
						<h3 class="main">NOTES</h3>
						<p>
							
						</p>
					</div>
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first"><i><a class="pginternal" href="#prose2.8">Prose</a>.</i> The prose follows the concluding prose passage of the <i>Reginsmol</i> without any interruption; the heading “Of Fafnir’s Death” is written in the manuscript very faintly just before stanza 1. <i>Gnitaheith</i>: cf. <i>Gripisspo</i>, 11 and note. <i>Fafnir</i>: Regin’s brother: cf. <i>Reginsmol</i>, prose after stanza 14. <i>Venom</i>: in the <i>Volsungasaga</i> it was the blood, and not the venom, that poured down on Sigurth’s head. Sigurth was much worried about this danger, and before he dug the trench asked Regin what would happen if the dragon’s blood overcame him. Regin thereupon taunted him with cowardice (Sigurth refers to this taunt in stanza 30, but the stanza embodying it has disappeared). After Sigurth had dug his trench, an old man (Othin, of course) appeared and advised him to dig other trenches to carry off the blood, which he did, thereby escaping harm.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.1"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.1">1</a>.</span> The first line in the original, as here, is unusually long, but dramatically very effective on that account.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.3"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.3">3</a>.</span> The names of the speakers do not appear in the manuscript, though they seem originally to have been indicated in the margin for stanzas 3–30. The last two lines of stanza 3 are missing in the manuscript, with no gap indicated, but the <i>Volsungasaga</i> prose paraphrase indicates that something was omitted, and the lines here given are conjecturally reconstructed from this paraphrase.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.4"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.4">4</a>.</span> The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.5"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.5">5</a>.</span> Line 4, utterly obscure in the manuscript, is guesswork<span class="corr" id="xd32e25272" title="Not in source">.</span></p>
						<p id="n2.8.7"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.7">7</a>.</span> Fafnir here refers to the fact that Hjordis, mother of the still unborn Sigurth, was captured by Alf after Sigmund’s death; cf. <i>Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i>, note.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.11"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.11">11</a>.</span> Stanzas 11–15 are probably interpolated, and come from a poem similar to <i>Vafthruthnismol</i>. <i>The headland</i>: Fafnir is apparently quoting proverbs; this one seems to mean that disaster (“the fate of the Norns”) awaits when one rounds the first headland (i.e., at the beginning of life’s voyage, in youth). The third line is a commentary on obstinate rashness. The <i>Volsungasaga</i> paraphrases stanzas 11–15 throughout.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.12"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.12">12</a>.</span> <i>Norns</i>: cf. stanza 13 and note. Sigurth has no possible interest in knowing what Norns are helpful in childbirth, but interpolations were seldom logical.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.13"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.13">13</a>.</span> Snorri quotes this stanza. There were minor Norns, or fates, in addition to the three great Norns, regarding whom cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 20. <i>Dvalin</i>: chief of the dwarfs; cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 14.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.14"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.14">14</a>.</span> <i>Surt</i>: ruler of the fire world; the reference is to the last great battle. <i>Sword-sweat</i>: blood.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.15"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.15">15</a>.</span> <i>Oskopnir</i> (“Not-Made”): apparently another name for Vigrith, which is named in <i>Vafthruthnismol</i>, 18, as the final battle-ground. <i>Bilrost</i> (or Bifrost): the rainbow bridge which breaks beneath Surt’s followers; cf. <i>Grimnismol</i>, 29 and note.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.16"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.16">16</a>.</span> With this stanza Fafnir returns to the situation. <i>Fear-helm</i>: regarding the “ægis-hjalmr” cf. <i>Reginsmol</i>, prose after stanza 14 and note.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.18"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.18">18</a>.</span> Lines 3–4 do not appear in the manuscript, and no gap is indicated; they are here conjecturally paraphrased from the prose passage in the <i>Volsungasaga</i>.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.20"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.20">20</a>.</span> It has been suggested that this stanza is spurious, and that stanza 21 ought to follow stanza 22. Lines 3–4, abbreviated in the manuscript, are identical with lines 3–4 of stanza 9. The <i>Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase in place of these two lines makes Fafnir say: “For it often happens that he who gets a deadly wound yet avenges himself.” It is quite likely that two stanzas have been lost.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.22"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.22">22</a>.</span> The <i>Volsungasaga</i> places its paraphrase of this stanza between those of stanzas 15 and 16.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.24"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.24">24</a>.</span> Line 2 is probably spurious, but it is a phrase typical of such poems as <i>Grimnismol</i> or <i>Vafthruthnismol</i>.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.25"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.25">25</a>.</span> <i>Gram</i>: Sigurth’s sword; cf. <i>Reginsmol</i>, prose after 14.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.26"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.26">26</a>.</span> In the manuscript stanzas 26–29 stand after stanza 31, which fails to make clear sense; they are here rearranged in accordance with the <i>Volsungasaga</i> paraphrase.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.28"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.28">28–29</a>.</span> Almost certainly interpolated from some such poem as the <i>Hovamol</i>. Even the faithful <i>Volsungasaga</i> fails to paraphrase stanza 29.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.30"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.30">30</a>.</span> Something has evidently been lost before this stanza. Sigurth clearly refers to Regin’s reproach when he was digging the trench (cf. note on introductory prose), but the poem does not give such a passage.</p>
						<p><i><a class="pginternal" href="#prose2.8.30">Prose</a>.</i> <i>Rithil</i> (“Swift-Moving”): Snorri calls the sword Refil (“Serpent”).</p>
						<p id="n2.8.32"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.32">32</a>.</span> That the birds’ stanzas come from more than one source is fairly apparent, but whether from two or from three or more is uncertain. It is also far from clear how many birds are speaking. The manuscript numbers II, III, and IV in the margin with numerals; the <i>Volsungasaga</i> makes a different bird speak each time. There are almost as many guesses as there are editions. I suspect that in the original poem there was one bird, speaking stanzas 34 and 37. Stanza 38 is little more than a repetition of stanza 34, and may well have been a later addition. As for the stanzas in Fornyrthislag (32–33 and 35–36), they apparently come from another poem, in which several birds speak (cf. “we sisters” in stanza 35). This may be the same poem from which stanzas 40–44 were taken, as well as some of the Fornyrthislag stanzas in the <i>Sigrdrifumol</i>.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.34"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.34">34</a>.</span> Some editions turn this speech from the third person into the second, but the manuscript is clear enough.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.35"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.35">35</a>.</span> <i>Wolf</i>, etc.: the phrase is nearly equivalent to “there must be fire where there is smoke.” The proverb appears elsewhere in Old Norse.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.36"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.36">36</a>.</span> <i>Tree of battle</i>: warrior.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.37"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.37">37</a>.</span> Here, as in stanza 34, some editions turn the speech from the third person into the second.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.38"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.38">38</a>.</span> <i>Giant</i>: Regin was certainly not a frost-giant, and the whole stanza looks like some copyist’s blundering reproduction of stanza 34.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.40"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.40">40</a>.</span> Neither the manuscript nor any of the editions suggest the existence of more than one bird in stanzas 40–44. It seems to me, however, that there are not only two birds, but two distinct stories. Stanzas 40–41 apply solely to Guthrun, and suggest that Sigurth will go straight to Gunnar’s hall. Stanzas 42–44, on the other hand, apply solely to Brynhild, and indicate that Sigurth will find her before he visits the Gjukungs. The confusion which existed between these two versions of the story, and which involved a fundamental difference in the final working out of Brynhild’s revenge, is commented on in the note on <i>Gripisspo</i>, 13. In the present passage it is possible that two birds are speaking, each reflecting one version of the story; it seems even more likely that one speech or the other (40–41 or 42–44) reflects the original form of the narrative, the other having been added, either later or from another poem. In the <i>Volsungasaga</i> the whole passage is condensed into a few words by one bird: “Wiser were it if he should then ride up on Hindarfjoll, where Brynhild sleeps, and there would he get much wisdom.” The Guthrun-bird does not appear at all.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.41"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.41">41</a>.</span> <i>Gjuki</i>: father of Gunnar and Guthrun: cf. <i>Gripisspo</i>, 13 and note.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.42"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.42">42</a>.</span> <i>Hindarfjoll</i>: “Mountain of the Hind.” <i>Light of the flood</i>: gold; cf. <i>Reginsmol</i>, 1 and note.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.43"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.43">43</a>.</span> <i>Battle-maid</i>: Brynhild, here clearly defined as a Valkyrie. <i>Bane of the wood</i>: fire. <i>Ygg</i>: Othin; cf. <i>Grimnismol</i>, 53. <i>The thorn</i>: a prose note in <i>Sigrdrifumol</i> calls it “sleep-thorn.” <i>The fighter</i>: the story of the reason for Brynhild’s punishment is told in the prose following stanza 4 of <i>Sigrdrifumol</i>.</p>
						<p id="n2.8.44"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.8.44">44</a>.</span> <i>Vingskornir</i>: Brynhild’s horse, not elsewhere mentioned. <i>Victory-bringer</i>: the word thus translated is in the original “sigrdrifa.” The compiler of the collection, not being familiar with this word, assumed that it was a proper name, and in the prose following stanza 4 of the <i>Sigrdrifumol</i> he specifically states that this was the Valkyrie’s name. Editors, until recently, have followed him in this error, failing to recognize that “sigrdrifa” was simply an epithet for Brynhild. It is from this blunder that the so-called <i>Sigrdrifumol</i> takes its name. Brynhild’s dual personality as a Valkyrie and as the daughter of Buthli has made plenty of trouble, but the addition of a second Valkyrie in the person of the supposed “Sigrdrifa” has made still more.</p>
						<p><i><a class="pginternal" href="#prose2.8.44">Prose</a>.</i> There is no break in the manuscript between the end of this prose passage and the beginning of the one introducing the <i>Sigrdrifumol</i>: some editors include the entire prose passage with one poem or the other. <i>Hrotti</i>; “Thruster.”</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
