<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 class="main">HOVAMOL</h2>
			<h2 class="sub">
				<i>The Ballad of the High One</i>
			</h2>
			<div class="divBody">
				<div class="div2 introNote section">
					
					<div class="divHead">
						<h3 class="main">
							<span class="sc">Introductory Note</span>
						</h3>
					</div>
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first">This poem follows the <i>Voluspo</i> in the <i lang="la">Codex Regius</i>, but is preserved in no other manuscript. The first stanza is quoted by Snorri, and two lines of stanza 84 appear in one of the sagas.</p>
						<p>In its present shape it involves the critic of the text in more puzzles than any other of the Eddic poems. Without going in detail into the various theories, what happened seems to have been somewhat as follows. There existed from very early times a collection of proverbs and wise counsels, which were attributed to Othin just as the Biblical proverbs were to Solomon. This collection, which presumably was always elastic in extent, was known as “The High One’s Words,” and forms the basis of the present poem. To it, however, were added other poems and fragments dealing with wisdom which seemed by their nature to imply that the speaker was Othin. Thus a catalogue of runes, or charms, was tacked on, and also a set of proverbs, differing essentially in form from those comprising the main collection. Here and there bits of verse more nearly narrative crept in; and of course the loose structure of the poem made it easy for any reciter to insert new stanzas almost at will. This curious miscellany is what we now have as the <i>Hovamol</i>.</p>
						<p>Five separate elements are pretty clearly recognizable: (1) the <i>Hovamol</i> proper (stanzas 1–80), a collection of proverbs and counsels for the conduct of life; (2) the <i>Loddfafnismol</i> (stanzas 111–138), a collection somewhat similar to the first, but specifically addressed to a certain Loddfafnir; (3) the <i>Ljothatal</i> (stanzas 147–165), a collection of charms; (4) the love-story of Othin and Billing’s daughter (stanzas 96–102), with an introductory dissertation on the faithlessness of women in general (stanzas 81–95), which probably crept into the poem first, and then pulled the story, as an apt illustration, after it; (5) the story of how Othin got the mead of poetry—the draught which gave him the gift of tongues—from the maiden Gunnloth (stanzas 103–110). There is also a brief passage (stanzas 139–146) telling how Othin won the runes, this passage being a natural introduction to the <i>Ljothatal</i>, and doubtless brought into the poem for that reason.</p>
						<p>It is idle to discuss the authorship or date of such a series of accretions as this. Parts of it are doubtless among the oldest relics of ancient Germanic poetry; parts of it may have originated at a relatively late period. Probably, however, most of its component elements go pretty far back, although we have no way of telling how or when they first became associated.</p>
						<p>It seems all but meaningless to talk about “interpolations” in a poem which has developed almost solely through the process of piecing together originally unrelated odds and ends. The notes, therefore, make only such suggestions as are needed to keep the main divisions of the poem distinct.</p>
						<p>Few gnomic collections in the world’s literary history present sounder wisdom more tersely expressed than the <i>Hovamol</i>. Like the Book of Proverbs it occasionally rises to lofty heights of poetry. If it presents the worldly wisdom of a violent race, it also shows noble ideals of loyalty, truth, and unfaltering courage.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="div2 section">
					
					<div class="divHead">
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.1">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.1">1</a>.</span> Within the gates   |   ere a man shall go,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">(Full warily let him watch,)</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Full long let him look about him;</p>
							<p class="line">For little he knows   |   where a foe may lurk,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And sit in the seats within.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.2">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.2">2</a>.</span> Hail to the giver!   |   a guest has come;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Where shall the stranger sit?</p>
							<p class="line">Swift shall he be   |   who with swords shall try</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The proof of his might to make.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>3</a>.</span> Fire he needs   |   who with frozen knees</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Has come from the cold without;</p>
							<p class="line">Food and clothes   |   must the farer have,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The man from the mountains come.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>4</a>.</span> Water and towels   |   and welcoming speech</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Should he find who comes to the feast;</p>
							<p class="line">If renown he would get,   |   and again be greeted,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Wisely and well must he act.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>5</a>.</span> Wits must he have   |   who wanders wide,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">But all is easy at home;</p>
							<p class="line">At the witless man   |   the wise shall wink</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When among such men he sits.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.6">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.6">6</a>.</span> A man shall not boast   |   of his keenness of mind,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">But keep it close in his breast;</p>
							<p class="line">To the silent and wise   |   does ill come seldom</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When he goes as guest to a house;</p>
							<p class="line">(For a faster friend   |   one never finds</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Than wisdom tried and true.)</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>7</a>.</span> The knowing guest   |   who goes to the feast,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">In silent attention sits;</p>
							<p class="line">With his ears he hears,   |   with his eyes he watches,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thus wary are wise men all.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>8</a>.</span> Happy the one   |   who wins for himself</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Favor and praises fair;</p>
							<p class="line">Less safe by far   |   is the wisdom found</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That is hid in another’s heart.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>9</a>.</span> Happy the man   |   who has while he lives</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Wisdom and praise as well,</p>
							<p class="line">For evil counsel   |   a man full oft</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Has from another’s heart.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>10</a>.</span> A better burden   |   may no man bear</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For wanderings wide than wisdom;</p>
							<p class="line">It is better than wealth   |   on unknown ways,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And in grief a refuge it gives.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>11</a>.</span> A better burden   |   may no man bear</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For wanderings wide than wisdom;</p>
							<p class="line">Worse food for the journey   |   he brings not afield</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Than an over-drinking of ale.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.12">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.12">12</a>.</span> Less good there lies   |   than most believe</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">In ale for mortal men;</p>
							<p class="line">For the more he drinks   |   the less does man</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Of his mind the mastery hold.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.13">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.13">13</a>.</span> Over beer the bird   |   of forgetfulness broods,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And steals the minds of men;</p>
							<p class="line">With the heron’s feathers   |   fettered I lay</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And in Gunnloth’s house was held.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.14">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.14">14</a>.</span> Drunk I was,   |   I was dead-drunk,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When with Fjalar wise I was;</p>
							<p class="line">’Tis the best of drinking   |   if back one brings</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">His wisdom with him home.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>15</a>.</span> The son of a king   |   shall be silent and wise,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And bold in battle as well;</p>
							<p class="line">Bravely and gladly   |   a man shall go,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Till the day of his death is come.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>16</a>.</span> The sluggard believes   |   he shall live forever,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If the fight he faces not;</p>
							<p class="line">But age shall not grant him   |   the gift of peace,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Though spears may spare his life.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>17</a>.</span> The fool is agape   |   when he comes to the feast,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">He stammers or else is still;</p>
							<p class="line">But soon if he gets   |   a drink is it seen</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">What the mind of the man is like.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>18</a>.</span> He alone is aware   |   who has wandered wide,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And far abroad has fared,</p>
							<p class="line">How great a mind   |   is guided by him</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That wealth of wisdom has.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>19</a>.</span> Shun not the mead,   |   but drink in measure;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Speak to the point or be still;</p>
							<p class="line">For rudeness none   |   shall rightly blame thee</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If soon thy bed thou seekest.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>20</a>.</span> The greedy man,   |   if his mind be vague,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Will eat till sick he is;</p>
							<p class="line">The vulgar man,   |   when among the wise,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To scorn by his belly is brought.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>21</a>.</span> The herds know well   |   when home they shall fare,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And then from the grass they go;</p>
							<p class="line">But the foolish man   |   his belly’s measure</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Shall never know aright.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>22</a>.</span> A paltry man   |   and poor of mind</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">At all things ever mocks;</p>
							<p class="line">For never he knows,   |   what he ought to know,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That he is not free from faults.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>23</a>.</span> The witless man   |   is awake all night,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thinking of many things;</p>
							<p class="line">Care-worn he is   |   when the morning comes,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And his woe is just as it was.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>24</a>.</span> The foolish man   |   for friends all those</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Who laugh at him will hold;</p>
							<p class="line">When among the wise   |   he marks it not</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Though hatred of him they speak.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.25">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.25">25</a>.</span> The foolish man   |   for friends all those</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Who laugh at him will hold;</p>
							<p class="line">But the truth when he comes   |   to the council he learns,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That few in his favor will speak.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>26</a>.</span> An ignorant man   |   thinks that all he knows,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When he sits by himself in a corner;</p>
							<p class="line">But never what answer   |   to make he knows,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When others with questions come.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.27">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.27">27</a>.</span> A witless man,   |   when he meets with men,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Had best in silence abide;</p>
							<p class="line">For no one shall find   |   that nothing he knows,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If his mouth is not open too much.</p>
							<p class="line">(But a man knows not,   |   if nothing he knows,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When his mouth has been open too much.)</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>28</a>.</span> Wise shall he seem   |   who well can question,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And also answer well;</p>
							<p class="line">Nought is concealed   |   that men may say</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Among the sons of men.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>29</a>.</span> Often he speaks   |   who never is still</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">With words that win no faith;</p>
							<p class="line">The babbling tongue,   |   if a bridle it find not,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Oft for itself sings ill.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>30</a>.</span> In mockery no one   |   a man shall hold,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Although he fare to the feast;</p>
							<p class="line">Wise seems one oft,   |   if nought he is asked,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And safely he sits dry-skinned.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>31</a>.</span> Wise a guest holds it   |   to take to his heels,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When mock of another he makes;</p>
							<p class="line">But little he knows   |   who laughs at the feast,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Though he mocks in the midst of his foes.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>32</a>.</span> Friendly of mind   |   are many men,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Till feasting they mock at their friends;</p>
							<p class="line">To mankind a bane   |   must it ever be</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When guests together strive.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>33</a>.</span> Oft should one make   |   an early meal,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Nor fasting come to the feast;</p>
							<p class="line">Else he sits and chews   |   as if he would choke,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And little is able to ask.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>34</a>.</span> Crooked and far   |   is the road to a foe,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Though his house on the highway be;</p>
							<p class="line">But wide and straight   |   is the way to a friend,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Though far away he fare.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>35</a>.</span> Forth shall one go,   |   nor stay as a guest</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">In a single spot forever;</p>
							<p class="line">Love becomes loathing   |   if long one sits</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">By the hearth in another’s home.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.36">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.36">36</a>.</span> Better a house,   |   though a hut it be,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A man is master at home;</p>
							<p class="line">A pair of goats   |   and a patched-up roof</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Are better far than begging.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.37">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.37">37</a>.</span> Better a house,   |   though a hut it be,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A man is master at home;</p>
							<p class="line">His heart is bleeding   |   who needs must beg</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When food he fain would have.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>38</a>.</span> Away from his arms   |   in the open field</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A man should fare not a foot;</p>
							<p class="line">For never he knows   |   when the need for a spear</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Shall arise on the distant road.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.39">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.39">39</a>.</span> If wealth a man   |   has won for himself,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Let him never suffer in need;</p>
							<p class="line">Oft he saves for a foe   |   what he plans for a friend,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For much goes worse than we wish.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.40">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.40">40</a>.</span> None so free with gifts   |   or food have I found</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That gladly he took not a gift,</p>
							<p class="line">Nor one who so widely   |   scattered his wealth</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That of recompense hatred he had.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.41">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.41">41</a>.</span> Friends shall gladden each other   |   with arms and garments,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">As each for himself can see;</p>
							<p class="line">Gift-givers’ friendships   |   are longest found,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If fair their fates may be.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>42</a>.</span> To his friend a man   |   a friend shall prove,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And gifts with gifts requite;</p>
							<p class="line">But men shall mocking   |   with mockery answer,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And fraud with falsehood meet.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>43</a>.</span> To his friend a man   |   a friend shall prove,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To him and the friend of his friend;</p>
							<p class="line">But never a man   |   shall friendship make</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">With one of his foeman’s friends.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>44</a>.</span> If a friend thou hast   |   whom thou fully wilt trust,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And good from him wouldst get,</p>
							<p class="line">Thy thoughts with his mingle,   |   and gifts shalt thou make,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And fare to find him oft.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>45</a>.</span> If another thou hast   |   whom thou hardly wilt trust,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Yet good from him wouldst get,</p>
							<p class="line">Thou shalt speak him fair,   |   but falsely think,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And fraud with falsehood requite.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>46</a>.</span> So is it with him   |   whom thou hardly wilt trust,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And whose mind thou mayst not know;</p>
							<p class="line">Laugh with him mayst thou,   |   but speak not thy mind,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Like gifts to his shalt thou give.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>47</a>.</span> Young was I once,   |   and wandered alone,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And nought of the road I knew;</p>
							<p class="line">Rich did I feel   |   when a comrade I found,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For man is man’s delight.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>48</a>.</span> The lives of the brave   |   and noble are best,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Sorrows they seldom feed;</p>
							<p class="line">But the coward fear   |   of all things feels,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And not gladly the niggard gives.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>49</a>.</span> My garments once   |   in a field I gave</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To a pair of carven poles;</p>
							<p class="line">Heroes they seemed   |   when clothes they had,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">But the naked man is nought.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>50</a>.</span> On the hillside drear   |   the fir-tree dies,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">All bootless its needles and bark;</p>
							<p class="line">It is like a man   |   whom no one loves,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Why should his life be long?</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>51</a>.</span> Hotter than fire   |   between false friends</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Does friendship five days burn;</p>
							<p class="line">When the sixth day comes   |   the fire cools,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And ended is all the love.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>52</a>.</span> No great thing needs   |   a man to give,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Oft little will purchase praise;</p>
							<p class="line">With half a loaf   |   and a half-filled cup</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A friend full fast I made.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>53</a>.</span> A little sand   |   has a little sea,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And small are the minds of men;</p>
							<p class="line">Though all men are not   |   equal in wisdom,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Yet half-wise only are all.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>54</a>.</span> A measure of wisdom   |   each man shall have,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">But never too much let him know;</p>
							<p class="line">The fairest lives   |   do those men live</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Whose wisdom wide has grown.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.55">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.55">55</a>.</span> A measure of wisdom   |   each man shall have,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">But never too much let him know;</p>
							<p class="line">For the wise man’s heart   |   is seldom happy,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If wisdom too great he has won.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>56</a>.</span> A measure of wisdom   |   each man shall have,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">But never too much let him know;</p>
							<p class="line">Let no man the fate   |   before him see,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For so is he freest from sorrow.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>57</a>.</span> A brand from a brand   |   is kindled and burned,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And fire from fire begotten;</p>
							<p class="line">And man by his speech   |   is known to men,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the stupid by their stillness.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>58</a>.</span> He must early go forth   |   who fain the blood</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Or the goods of another would get;</p>
							<p class="line">The wolf that lies idle   |   shall win little meat,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Or the sleeping man success.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>59</a>.</span> He must early go forth   |   whose workers are few,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Himself his work to seek;</p>
							<p class="line">Much remains undone   |   for the morning-sleeper,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For the swift is wealth half won.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>60</a>.</span> Of seasoned shingles   |   and strips of bark</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For the thatch let one know his need,</p>
							<p class="line">And how much of wood   |   he must have for a month,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Or in half a year he will use.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.61">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.61">61</a>.</span> Washed and fed   |   to the council fare,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">But care not too much for thy clothes;</p>
							<p class="line">Let none be ashamed   |   of his shoes and hose,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Less still of the steed he rides,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">(Though poor be the horse he has.)</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.62">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.62">62</a>.</span> When the eagle comes   |   to the ancient sea,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">He snaps and hangs his head;</p>
							<p class="line">So is a man   |   in the midst of a throng,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Who few to speak for him finds.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>63</a>.</span> To question and answer   |   must all be ready</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Who wish to be known as wise;</p>
							<p class="line">Tell one thy thoughts,   |   but beware of two,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">All know what is known to three.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>64</a>.</span> The man who is prudent   |   a measured use</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Of the might he has will make;</p>
							<p class="line">He finds when among   |   the brave he fares</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That the boldest he may not be.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.65">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.65">65</a>.</span> .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .</p>
							<p class="line">Oft for the words   |   that to others one speaks</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">He will get but an evil gift.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>66</a>.</span> Too early to many   |   a meeting I came,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And some too late have I sought;</p>
							<p class="line">The beer was all drunk,   |   or not yet brewed;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Little the loathed man finds.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>67</a>.</span> To their homes men would bid me   |   hither and yon,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If at meal-time I needed no meat,</p>
							<p class="line">Or would hang two hams   |   in my true friend’s house,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Where only one I had eaten.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>68</a>.</span> Fire for men   |   is the fairest gift,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And power to see the sun;</p>
							<p class="line">Health as well,   |   if a man may have it,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And a life not stained with sin.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>69</a>.</span> All wretched is no man,   |   though never so sick;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Some from their sons have joy,</p>
							<p class="line">Some win it from kinsmen,   |   and some from their wealth,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And some from worthy works.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.70">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.70">70</a>.</span> It is better to live   |   than to lie a corpse,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The live man catches the cow;</p>
							<p class="line">I saw flames rise   |   for the rich man’s pyre,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And before his door he lay dead.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>71</a>.</span> The lame rides a horse,   |   the handless is herdsman,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The deaf in battle is bold;</p>
							<p class="line">The blind man is better   |   than one that is burned,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">No good can come of a corpse.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>72</a>.</span> A son is better,   |   though late he be born,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And his father to death have fared;</p>
							<p class="line">Memory-stones   |   seldom stand by the road</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Save when kinsman honors his kin.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.73">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.73">73</a>.</span> Two make a battle,   |   the tongue slays the head;</p>
							<p class="line">In each furry coat   |   a fist I look for.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>74</a>.</span> He welcomes the night   |   whose fare is enough.</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">(Short are the yards of a ship,)</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Uneasy are autumn nights;</p>
							<p class="line">Full oft does the weather   |   change in a week,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And more in a month’s time.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.75">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.75">75</a>.</span> A man knows not,   |   if nothing he knows,</p>
							<p class="line">That gold oft apes begets;</p>
							<p class="line">One man is wealthy   |   and one is poor,</p>
							<p class="line">Yet scorn for him none should know.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.76">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.76">76</a>.</span> Among Fitjung’s sons   |   saw I well-stocked folds,—</p>
							<p class="line">Now bear they the beggar’s staff;</p>
							<p class="line">Wealth is as swift   |   as a winking eye,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Of friends the falsest it is.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>77</a>.</span> Cattle die,   |   and kinsmen die,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And so one dies one’s self;</p>
							<p class="line">But a noble name   |   will never die,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If good renown one gets.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>78</a>.</span> Cattle die,   |   and kinsmen die,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And so one dies one’s self;</p>
							<p class="line">One thing I know   |   that never dies,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The fame of a dead man’s deeds.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.79">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.79">79</a>.</span> Certain is that   |   which is sought from runes,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That the gods so great have made,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the Master-Poet painted;</p>
							<p class="line">.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">.  .  .  .  . of the race of gods:</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Silence is safest and best.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>80</a>.</span> An unwise man,   |   if a maiden’s love</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Or wealth he chances to win,</p>
							<p class="line">His pride will wax,   |   but his wisdom never,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Straight forward he fares in conceit.</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first verseStars">*    *    *    *    *    *</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.81">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.81">81</a>.</span> Give praise to the day at evening,   |   to a woman on her pyre,</p>
							<p class="line">To a weapon which is tried,   |   to a maid at wedlock,</p>
							<p class="line">To ice when it is crossed,   |   to ale that is drunk.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>82</a>.</span> When the gale blows hew wood,   |   in fair winds seek the water;</p>
							<p class="line">Sport with maidens at dusk,   |   for day’s eyes are many;</p>
							<p class="line">From the ship seek swiftness,   |   from the shield protection,</p>
							<p class="line">Cuts from the sword,   |   from the maiden kisses.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>83</a>.</span> By the fire drink ale,   |   over ice go on skates;</p>
							<p class="line">Buy a steed that is lean,   |   and a sword when tarnished,</p>
							<p class="line">The horse at home fatten,   |   the hound in thy dwelling.</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first verseStars">*    *    *    *    *    *</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.84">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.84">84</a>.</span> A man shall trust not   |   the oath of a maid,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Nor the word a woman speaks;</p>
							<p class="line">For their hearts on a whirling   |   wheel were fashioned,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And fickle their breasts were formed.</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first verseStars">*    *    *    *    *    *</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.85">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.85">85</a>.</span> In a breaking bow   |   or a burning flame,</p>
							<p class="line">A ravening wolf   |   or a croaking raven,</p>
							<p class="line">In a grunting boar,   |   a tree with roots broken,</p>
							<p class="line">In billowy seas   |   or a bubbling kettle,</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>86</a>.</span> In a flying arrow   |   or falling waters,</p>
							<p class="line">In ice new formed   |   or the serpent’s folds,</p>
							<p class="line">In a bride’s bed-speech   |   or a broken sword,</p>
							<p class="line">In the sport of bears   |   or in sons of kings,</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.87">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.87">87</a>.</span> In a calf that is sick   |   or a stubborn thrall,</p>
							<p class="line">A flattering witch   |   or a foe new slain.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.88">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.88">88</a>.</span> In a brother’s slayer,   |   if thou meet him abroad,</p>
							<p class="line">In a half-burned house,   |   in a horse full swift—</p>
							<p class="line">One leg is hurt   |   and the horse is useless—</p>
							<p class="line">None had ever such faith   |   as to trust in them all.</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first verseStars">*    *    *    *    *    *</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>89</a>.</span> Hope not too surely   |   for early harvest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Nor trust too soon in thy son;</p>
							<p class="line">The field needs good weather,   |   the son needs wisdom,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And oft is either denied.</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first verseStars">*    *    *    *    *    *</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>90</a>.</span> The love of women   |   fickle of will</p>
							<p class="line">Is like starting o’er ice   |   with a steed unshod,</p>
							<p class="line">A two-year-old restive   |   and little tamed,</p>
							<p class="line">Or steering a rudderless   |   ship in a storm,</p>
							<p class="line">Or, lame, hunting reindeer   |   on slippery rocks.</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first verseStars">*    *    *    *    *    *</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>91</a>.</span> Clear now will I speak,   |   for I know them both,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Men false to women are found;</p>
							<p class="line">When fairest we speak,   |   then falsest we think,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Against wisdom we work with deceit.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>92</a>.</span> Soft words shall he speak   |   and wealth shall he offer</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Who longs for a maiden’s love,</p>
							<p class="line">And the beauty praise   |   of the maiden bright;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">He wins whose wooing is best.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>93</a>.</span> Fault for loving   |   let no man find</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Ever with any other;</p>
							<p class="line">Oft the wise are fettered,   |   where fools go free,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">By beauty that breeds desire.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>94</a>.</span> Fault with another   |   let no man find</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For what touches many a man;</p>
							<p class="line">Wise men oft   |   into witless fools</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Are made by mighty love.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>95</a>.</span> The head alone knows   |   what dwells near the heart,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A man knows his mind alone;</p>
							<p class="line">No sickness is worse   |   to one who is wise</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Than to lack the longed-for joy.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.96">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.96">96</a>.</span> This found I myself,   |   when I sat in the reeds,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And long my love awaited;</p>
							<p class="line">As my life the maiden   |   wise I loved,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Yet her I never had.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>97</a>.</span> Billing’s daughter   |   I found on her bed,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">In slumber bright as the sun;</p>
							<p class="line">Empty appeared   |   an earl’s estate</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Without that form so fair.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>98</a>.</span> “Othin, again   |   at evening come,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If a woman thou wouldst win;</p>
							<p class="line">Evil it were   |   if others than we</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Should know of such a sin.”</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>99</a>.</span> Away I hastened,   |   hoping for joy,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And careless of counsel wise;</p>
							<p class="line">Well I believed   |   that soon I should win</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Measureless joy with the maid.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>100</a>.</span> So came I next   |   when night it was,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The warriors all were awake;</p>
							<p class="line">With burning lights   |   and waving brands</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">I learned my luckless way.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>101</a>.</span> At morning then,   |   when once more I came,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And all were sleeping still,</p>
							<p class="line">A dog I found   |   in the fair one’s place,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Bound there upon her bed.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.102">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.102">102</a>.</span> Many fair maids,   |   if a man but tries them,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">False to a lover are found;</p>
							<p class="line">That did I learn   |   when I longed to gain</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">With wiles the maiden wise;</p>
							<p class="line">Foul scorn was my meed   |   from the crafty maid,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And nought from the woman I won.</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first verseStars">*    *    *    *    *    *</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.103">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.103">103</a>.</span> Though glad at home,   |   and merry with guests,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A man shall be wary and wise;</p>
							<p class="line">The sage and shrewd,   |   wide wisdom seeking,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Must see that his speech be fair;</p>
							<p class="line">A fool is he named   |   who nought can say,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For such is the way of the witless.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.104">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.104">104</a>.</span> I found the old giant,   |   now back have I fared,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Small gain from silence I got;</p>
							<p class="line">Full many a word,   |   my will to get,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">I spoke in Suttung’s hall.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.105">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.105">105</a>.</span> The mouth of Rati   |   made room for my passage,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And space in the stone he gnawed;</p>
							<p class="line">Above and below   |   the giants’ paths lay,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">So rashly I risked my head.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.106">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.106">106</a>.</span> Gunnloth gave   |   on a golden stool</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A drink of the marvelous mead;</p>
							<p class="line">A harsh reward   |   did I let her have</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For her heroic heart,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And her spirit troubled sore.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.107">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.107">107</a>.</span> The well-earned beauty   |   well I enjoyed,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Little the wise man lacks;</p>
							<p class="line">So Othrörir now   |   has up been brought</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To the midst of the men of earth.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>108</a>.</span> Hardly, methinks,   |   would I home have come,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And left the giants’ land,</p>
							<p class="line">Had not Gunnloth helped me,   |   the maiden good,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Whose arms about me had been.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.109">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.109">109</a>.</span> The day that followed,   |   the frost-giants came,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e703">Some word of Hor to win,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">(And into the hall of Hor;)</p>
							<p class="line">Of Bolverk they asked,   |   were he back midst the gods,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Or had Suttung slain him there?</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>110</a>.</span> On his ring swore Othin   |   the oath, methinks;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Who now his troth shall trust?</p>
							<p class="line">Suttung’s betrayal   |   he sought with drink,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And Gunnloth to grief he left.</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first verseStars">*    *    *    *    *    *</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.111">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.111">111</a>.</span> It is time to chant   |   from the chanter’s stool;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">By the wells of Urth I was,</p>
							<p class="line">I saw and was silent,   |   I saw and thought,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And heard the speech of Hor.</p>
							<p class="line">(Of runes heard I words,   |   nor were counsels wanting,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">At the hall of Hor,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">In the hall of Hor;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Such was the speech I heard.)</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.112">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.112">112</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">Rise not at night,   |   save if news thou seekest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Or fain to the outhouse wouldst fare.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>113</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">Beware of sleep   |   on a witch’s bosom,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Nor let her limbs ensnare thee.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>114</a>.</span> Such is her might   |   that thou hast no mind</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For the council or meeting of men;</p>
							<p class="line">Meat thou hatest,   |   joy thou hast not,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And sadly to slumber thou farest.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>115</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">Seek never to win   |   the wife of another,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Or long for her secret love.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>116</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">If o’er mountains or gulfs   |   thou fain wouldst go,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Look well to thy food for the way.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>117</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">An evil man   |   thou must not let</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Bring aught of ill to thee;</p>
							<p class="line">For an evil man   |   will never make</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Reward for a worthy thought.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>118</a>.</span> I saw a man   |   who was wounded sore</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">By an evil woman’s word;</p>
							<p class="line">A lying tongue   |   his death-blow launched,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And no word of truth there was.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>119</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">If a friend thou hast   |   whom thou fully wilt trust,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Then fare to find him oft;</p>
							<p class="line">For brambles grow   |   and waving grass</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">On the rarely trodden road.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>120</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">A good man find   |   to hold in friendship,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e4102">And give heed to his healing charms.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>121</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">Be never the first   |   to break with thy friend</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The bond that holds you both;</p>
							<p class="line">Care eats the heart   |   if thou canst not speak</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To another all thy thought.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>122</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">Exchange of words   |   with a witless ape</p>
							<p class="line xd32e4102">Thou must not ever make.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>123</a>.</span> For never thou mayst   |   from an evil man</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A good requital get;</p>
							<p class="line">But a good man oft   |   the greatest love</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Through words of praise will win thee.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>124</a>.</span> Mingled is love   |   when a man can speak</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To another all his thought;</p>
							<p class="line">Nought is so bad   |   as false to be,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">No friend speaks only fair.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>125</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">With a worse man speak not   |   three words in dispute,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Ill fares the better oft</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When the worse man wields a sword.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>126</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">A shoemaker be,   |   or a maker of shafts,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For only thy single self;</p>
							<p class="line">If the shoe is ill made,   |   or the shaft prove false,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Then evil of thee men think.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>127</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">If evil thou knowest,   |   as evil proclaim it,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And make no friendship with foes.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>128</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">In evil never   |   joy shalt thou know,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">But glad the good shall make thee.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.129">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.129">129</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">Look not up   |   when the battle is on,—</p>
							<p class="line">(Like madmen the sons   |   of men become,—)</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Lest men bewitch thy wits.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>130</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">If thou fain wouldst win   |   a woman’s love,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And gladness get from her,</p>
							<p class="line">Fair be thy promise   |   and well fulfilled;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">None loathes what good he gets.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.131">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.131">131</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">I bid thee be wary,   |   but be not fearful;</p>
							<p class="line">(Beware most with ale   |   or another’s wife,</p>
							<p class="line">And third beware   |   lest a thief outwit thee.)</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>132</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">Scorn or mocking   |   ne’er shalt thou make</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Of a guest or a journey-goer.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.133">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.133">133</a>.</span> Oft scarcely he knows   |   who sits in the house</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">What kind is the man who comes;</p>
							<p class="line">None so good is found   |   that faults he has not,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Nor so wicked that nought he is worth.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.134">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.134">134</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">Scorn not ever   |   the gray-haired singer,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Oft do the old speak good;</p>
							<p class="line">(Oft from shrivelled skin   |   come skillful counsels,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Though it hang with the hides,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And flap with the pelts,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And is blown with the bellies.)</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>135</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">Curse not thy guest,   |   nor show him thy gate,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Deal well with a man in want.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.136">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.136">136</a>.</span> Strong is the beam   |   that raised must be</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To give an entrance to all;</p>
							<p class="line">Give it a ring,   |   or grim will be</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The wish it would work on thee.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.137">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.137">137</a>.</span> I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit thou hast if thou hearest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Great thy gain if thou learnest:</p>
							<p class="line">When ale thou drinkest,   |   seek might of earth,</p>
							<p class="line">(For earth cures drink,   |   and fire cures ills,</p>
							<p class="line">The oak cures tightness,   |   the ear cures magic,</p>
							<p class="line">Rye cures rupture,   |   the moon cures rage,</p>
							<p class="line">Grass cures the scab,   |   and runes the sword-cut;)</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The field absorbs the flood.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.138">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.138">138</a>.</span> Now are Hor’s words   |   spoken in the hall,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Kind for the kindred of men,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Cursed for the kindred of giants:</p>
							<p class="line">Hail to the speaker,   |   and to him who learns!</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Profit be his who has them!</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Hail to them who hearken</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first verseStars">*    *    *    *    *    *</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.139">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.139">139</a>.</span> I ween that I hung   |   on the windy tree,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Hung there for nights full nine;</p>
							<p class="line">With the spear I was wounded,   |   and offered I was</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To Othin, myself to myself,</p>
							<p class="line">On the tree that none   |   may ever know</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">What root beneath it runs.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>140</a>.</span> None made me happy   |   with loaf or horn,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And there below I looked;</p>
							<p class="line">I took up the runes,   |   shrieking I took them,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And forthwith back I fell.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.141">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.141">141</a>.</span> Nine mighty songs   |   I got from the son</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Of Bolthorn, Bestla’s father;</p>
							<p class="line">And a drink I got   |   of the goodly mead</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Poured out from Othrörir.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>142</a>.</span> Then began I to thrive,   |   and wisdom to get,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">I grew and well I was;</p>
							<p class="line">Each word led me on   |   to another word,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Each deed to another deed.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.143">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.143">143</a>.</span> Runes shalt thou find,   |   and fateful signs,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That the king of singers colored,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the mighty gods have made;</p>
							<p class="line">Full strong the signs,   |   full mighty the signs</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That the ruler of gods doth write.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.144">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.144">144</a>.</span> Othin for the gods,   |   Dain for the elves,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And Dvalin for the dwarfs,</p>
							<p class="line">Alsvith for giants   |   and all mankind,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And some myself I wrote.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.145">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.145">145</a>.</span> Knowest how one shall write,   |   knowest how one shall rede?</p>
							<p class="line">Knowest how one shall tint,   |   knowest how one makes trial?</p>
							<p class="line">Knowest how one shall ask,   |   knowest how one shall offer?</p>
							<p class="line">Knowest how one shall send,   |   knowest how one shall sacrifice?</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.146">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.146">146</a>.</span> Better no prayer   |   than too big an offering,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">By thy getting measure thy gift;</p>
							<p class="line">Better is none   |   than too big a sacrifice,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .</p>
							<p class="line">So Thund of old wrote   |   ere man’s race began,</p>
							<p class="line">Where he rose on high   |   when home he came.</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first verseStars">*    *    *    *    *    *</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.147">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.147">147</a>.</span> The songs I know   |   that king’s wives know not,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Nor men that are sons of men;</p>
							<p class="line">The first is called help,   |   and help it can bring thee</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">In sorrow and pain and sickness.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.148">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.148">148</a>.</span> A second I know,   |   that men shall need</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Who leechcraft long to use;</p>
							<p class="line">.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>149</a>.</span> A third I know,   |   if great is my need</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Of fetters to hold my foe;</p>
							<p class="line">Blunt do I make   |   mine enemy’s blade,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Nor bites his sword or staff.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>150</a>.</span> A fourth I know,   |   if men shall fasten</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Bonds on my bended legs;</p>
							<p class="line">So great is the charm   |   that forth I may go,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The fetters spring from my feet,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Broken the bonds from my hands.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>151</a>.</span> A fifth I know,   |   if I see from afar</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">An arrow fly ’gainst the folk;</p>
							<p class="line">It flies not so swift   |   that I stop it not,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If ever my eyes behold it.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.152">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.152">152</a>.</span> A sixth I know,   |   if harm one seeks</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">With a sapling’s roots to send me;</p>
							<p class="line">The hero himself   |   who wreaks his hate</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Shall taste the ill ere I.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>153</a>.</span> A seventh I know,   |   if I see in flames</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The hall o’er my comrades’ heads;</p>
							<p class="line">It burns not so wide   |   that I will not quench it,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">I know that song to sing.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>154</a>.</span> An eighth I know,   |   that is to all</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Of greatest good to learn;</p>
							<p class="line">When hatred grows   |   among heroes’ sons,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">I soon can set it right.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>155</a>.</span> A ninth I know,   |   if need there comes</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To shelter my ship on the flood;</p>
							<p class="line">The wind I calm   |   upon the waves,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the sea I put to sleep.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.156">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.156">156</a>.</span> A tenth I know,   |   what time I see</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">House-riders flying on high;</p>
							<p class="line">So can I work   |   that wildly they go,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Showing their true shapes,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Hence to their own homes.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.157">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.157">157</a>.</span> An eleventh I know,   |   if needs I must lead</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To the fight my long-loved friends;</p>
							<p class="line">I sing in the shields,   |   and in strength they go</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Whole to the field of fight,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Whole from the field of fight,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And whole they come thence home.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.158">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.158">158</a>.</span> A twelfth I know,   |   if high on a tree</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">I see a hanged man swing;</p>
							<p class="line">So do I write   |   and color the runes</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That forth he fares,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And to me talks.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.159">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.159">159</a>.</span> A thirteenth I know,   |   if a thane full young</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">With water I sprinkle well;</p>
							<p class="line">He shall not fall,   |   though he fares mid the host,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Nor sink beneath the swords.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>160</a>.</span> A fourteenth I know,   |   if fain I would name</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To men the mighty gods;</p>
							<p class="line">All know I well   |   of the gods and elves,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Few be the fools know this.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.161">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.161">161</a>.</span> A fifteenth I know,   |   that before the doors</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Of Delling sang Thjothrörir the dwarf;</p>
							<p class="line">Might he sang for the gods,   |   and glory for elves,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And wisdom for Hroptatyr wise.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>162</a>.</span> A sixteenth I know,   |   if I seek delight</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To win from a maiden wise;</p>
							<p class="line">The mind I turn   |   of the white-armed maid,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And thus change all her thoughts.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.163">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.163">163</a>.</span> A seventeenth I know,   |   so that seldom shall go</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A maiden young from me;</p>
							<p class="line">.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.164">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.164">164</a>.</span> Long these songs   |   thou shalt, Loddfafnir,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Seek in vain to sing;</p>
							<p class="line">Yet good it were   |   if thou mightest get them,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Well, if thou wouldst them learn,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Help, if thou hadst them.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.2.165">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.2.165">165</a>.</span> An eighteenth I know,   |   that ne’er will I tell</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To maiden or wife of man,—</p>
							<p class="line">The best is what none   |   but one’s self doth know,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">So comes the end of the songs,—</p>
							<p class="line">Save only to her   |   in whose arms I lie,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Or who else my sister is.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="div2 endNotes last-child section">
					
					<div class="divHead">
						<h3 class="main">NOTES</h3>
					</div>
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first" id="n1.2.1"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.1">1</a>.</span> This stanza is quoted by Snorri, the second line being omitted in most of the <i>Prose Edda</i> manuscripts.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.2"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.2">2</a>.</span> Probably the first and second lines had originally nothing to do with the third and fourth, the last two not referring to host or guest, but to the general danger of backing one’s views with the sword.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.6"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.6">6</a>.</span> Lines 5 and 6 appear to have been added to the stanza.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.12"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.12">12</a>.</span> Some editors have combined this stanza in various ways with the last two lines of stanza 11, as in the manuscript the first two lines of the latter are abbreviated, and, if they belong there at all, are presumably identical with the first two lines of stanza 10.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.13"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.13">13</a>.</span> <i>The heron</i>: the bird of forgetfulness, referred to in line 1. <i>Gunnloth</i>: the daughter of the giant Suttung, from whom Othin won the mead of poetry. For this episode see stanzas 104–110.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.14"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.14">14</a>.</span> <i>Fjalar</i>: apparently another name for Suttung. This stanza, and probably 13, seem to have been inserted as illustrative.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.25"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.25">25</a>.</span> The first two lines are abbreviated in the manuscript, but are doubtless identical with the first two lines of stanza 24.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.27"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.27">27</a>.</span> The last two lines were probably added as a commentary on lines 3 and 4.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.36"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.36">36</a>.</span> The manuscript has “little” in place of “a hut” in line 1, but this involves an error in the initial-rhymes, and the emendation has been generally accepted.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.37"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.37">37</a>.</span> Lines 1 and 2 are abbreviated in the manuscript, but are doubtless identical with the first two lines of stanza 36.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.39"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.39">39</a>.</span> In the manuscript this stanza follows stanza 40.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.40"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.40">40</a>.</span> The key-word in line 3 is missing in the manuscript, but editors have agreed in inserting a word meaning “generous.”</p>
						<p id="n1.2.41"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.41">41</a>.</span> In line 3 the manuscript adds “givers again” to “gift-givers.”</p>
						<p id="n1.2.55"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.55">55–56</a>.</span> The first pairs of lines are abbreviated in the manuscript.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.61"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.61">61</a>.</span> The fifth line is probably a spurious addition.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.62"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.62">62</a>.</span> This stanza follows stanza 63 in the manuscript, but there are marks therein indicating the transposition.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.65"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.65">65</a>.</span> The manuscript indicates no lacuna (lines 1 and 2). Many editors have filled out the stanza with two lines from late paper manuscripts, the passage running:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line">“A man must be watchful   |   and wary as well,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And fearful of trusting a friend.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first" id="n1.2.70"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.70">70</a>.</span> The manuscript has “and a worthy life” in place of “than to lie a corpse” in line 1, but Rask suggested the emendation as early as 1818, and most editors have followed him.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.73"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.73">73–74</a>.</span> These seven lines are obviously a jumble. The two lines of stanza 73 not only appear out of place, but the verse-form is unlike that of the surrounding stanzas. In 74, the second line is clearly interpolated, and line 1 has little enough connection with lines 3, 4 and 5. It looks as though some compiler (or copyist) had inserted here various odds and ends for which he could find no better place.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.75"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.75">75</a>.</span> The word “gold” in line 2 is more or less conjectural, the manuscript being obscure. The reading in line 4 is also doubtful.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.76"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.76">76</a>.</span> In the manuscript this stanza follows 78, the order being: 77, 78, 76, 80, 79, 81. <i>Fitjung</i> (“the Nourisher”): Earth.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.79"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.79">79</a>.</span> This stanza is certainly in bad shape, and probably out of place here. Its reference to runes as magic signs suggests that it properly belongs in some list of charms like the <i>Ljothatal</i> (stanzas 147–165). The stanza-form is so irregular as to show either that something has been lost or that there have been interpolations. The manuscript indicates no lacuna; Gering fills out the assumed gap as follows:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line">“Certain is that   |   which is sought from runes,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The runes—,” etc.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first" id="n1.2.81"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.81">81</a>.</span> With this stanza the verse-form, as indicated in the translation, abruptly changes to Malahattr. What has happened seems to have been something like this. Stanza 80 introduces the idea of man’s love for woman. Consequently some reciter or compiler (or possibly even a copyist) took occasion to insert at this point certain stanzas concerning the ways of women. Thus stanza 80 would account for the introduction of stanzas 81 and 82, which, in turn, apparently drew stanza 83 in with them. Stanza 84 suggests the fickleness of women, and is immediately followed—again with a change of verse-form—by a list of things equally untrustworthy (stanzas 85–90). Then, after a few more stanzas on love in the regular measure of the <i>Hovamol</i> (stanzas 91–95), is introduced, by way of illustration, Othin’s story of his adventure with Billing’s daughter (stanzas 96–102). Some such process of growth, whatever its specific stages may have been, must be assumed to account for the curious chaos of the whole passage from stanza 81 to stanza 102.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.84"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.84">84</a>.</span> Lines 3 and 4 are quoted in the <i>Fostbræthrasaga</i>.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.85"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.85">85</a>.</span> Stanzas 85–88 and 90 are in Fornyrthislag, and clearly come from a different source from the rest of the <i>Hovamol</i>.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.87"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.87">87</a>.</span> The stanza is doubtless incomplete. Some editors add from a late paper manuscript two lines running:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line">“In a light, clear sky   |   or a laughing throng,</p>
							<p class="line">In the howl of a dog   |   or a harlot’s grief.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first" id="n1.2.88"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.88">88</a>.</span> This stanza follows stanza 89 in the manuscript. Many editors have changed the order, for while stanza 89 is pretty clearly an interpolation wherever it stands, it seriously interferes with the sense if it breaks in between 87 and 88.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.96"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.96">96</a>.</span> Here begins the passage (stanzas 96–102) illustrating the falseness of woman by the story of Othin’s unsuccessful love-affair with Billing’s daughter. Of this person we know nothing beyond what is here told, but the story needs little comment.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.102"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.102">102</a>.</span> Rask adds at the beginning of this stanza two lines from a late paper manuscript, running:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line">“Few are so good   |   that false they are never</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To cheat the mind of a man.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first">He makes these two lines plus lines 1 and 2 a full stanza, and lines 3, 4, 5, and 6 a second stanza.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.103"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.103">103</a>.</span> With this stanza the subject changes abruptly, and apparently the virtues of fair speech, mentioned in the last three lines, account for the introduction, from what source cannot be known, of the story of Othin and the mead of song (stanzas 104–110).</p>
						<p id="n1.2.104"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.104">104</a>.</span> The giant <i>Suttung</i> (“the old giant”) possessed the magic mead, a draught of which conferred the gift of poetry. Othin, desiring to obtain it, changed himself into a snake, bored his way through a mountain into Suttung’s home, made love to the giant’s daughter, Gunnloth, and by her connivance drank up all the mead. Then he flew away in the form of an eagle, leaving Gunnloth to her fate. While with Suttung he assumed the name of Bolverk (“the Evil-Doer”).</p>
						<p id="n1.2.105"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.105">105</a>.</span> <i>Rati</i> (“the Traveller”): the gimlet with which Othin bored through the mountain to reach Suttung’s home.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.106"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.106">106</a>.</span> Probably either the fourth or the fifth line is a spurious addition.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.107"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.107">107</a>.</span> <i>Othrörir</i>: here the name of the magic mead itself, whereas in stanza 141 it is the name of the vessel containing it. Othin had no intention of bestowing any of the precious mead upon men, but as he was flying over the earth, hotly pursued by Suttung, he spilled some of it out of his mouth, and in this way mankind also won the gift of poetry.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.109"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.109">109</a>.</span> <i>Hor</i>: Othin (“the High One”). The frost-giants, Suttung’s kinsmen, appear not to have suspected Othin of being identical with Bolverk, possibly because the oath referred to in stanza 110 was an oath made by Othin to Suttung that there was no such person as Bolverk among the gods. The giants, of course, fail to get from Othin the information they seek concerning Bolverk, but Othin is keenly conscious of having violated the most sacred of oaths, that sworn on his ring.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.111"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.111">111</a>.</span> With this stanza begins the Loddfafnismol (stanzas 111–138). Loddfafnir is apparently a wandering singer, who, from his “chanter’s stool,” recites the verses which he claims to have received from Othin. <i>Wells of Urth</i>: cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 19 and note. Urth (“the Past”) is one of the three Norns. This stanza is apparently in corrupt form, and editors have tried many experiments with it, both in rejecting lines as spurious and in rearranging the words and punctuation. It looks rather as though the first four lines formed a complete stanza, and the last four had crept in later. The phrase translated “the speech of Hor” is “Hova mol,” later used as the title for the entire poem.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.112"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.112">112</a>.</span> Lines 1–3 are the formula, repeated (abbreviated in the manuscript) in most of the stanzas, with which Othin prefaces his counsels to Loddfafnir, and throughout this section, except in stanzas 111 and 138, Loddfafnir represents himself as simply quoting Othin’s words. The material is closely analogous to that contained in the first eighty stanzas of the poem. In some cases (e.g., stanzas 117, 119, 121, 126 and 130) the formula precedes a full four-line stanza instead of two (or three) lines.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.129"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.129">129</a>.</span> Line 5 is apparently interpolated.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.131"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.131">131</a>.</span> Lines 5–6 probably were inserted from a different poem.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.133"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.133">133</a>.</span> Many editors reject the last two lines of this stanza as spurious, putting the first two lines at the end of the preceding stanza. Others, attaching lines 3 and 4 to stanza 132, insert as the first two lines of stanza 133 two lines from a late paper manuscript, running:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line">“Evil and good   |   do men’s sons ever</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852"><span id="xd32e5061"/>Mingled bear in their breasts.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first" id="n1.2.134"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.134">134</a>.</span> Presumably the last four lines have been added to this stanza, for the parallelism in the last three makes it probable that they belong together. The wrinkled skin of the old man is compared with the dried skins and bellies of animals kept for various purposes hanging in an Icelandic house.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.136"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.136">136</a>.</span> This stanza suggests the dangers of too much hospitality. The beam (bolt) which is ever being raised to admit guests becomes weak thereby. It needs a ring to help it in keeping the door closed, and without the ability at times to ward off guests a man becomes the victim of his own generosity.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.137"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.137">137</a>.</span> The list of “household remedies” in this stanza is doubtless interpolated. Their nature needs no comment here.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.138"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.138">138</a>.</span> In the manuscript this stanza comes at the end of the entire poem, following stanza 165. Most recent editors have followed Müllenhoff in shifting it to this position, as it appears to conclude the passage introduced by the somewhat similar stanza III.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.139"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.139">139</a>.</span> With this stanza begins the most confusing part of the <i>Hovamol</i>: the group of eight stanzas leading up to the <i>Ljothatal</i>, or list of charms. Certain paper manuscripts have before this stanza a title: “Othin’s Tale of the Runes.” Apparently stanzas 139, 140 and 142 are fragments of an account of how Othin obtained the runes; 141 is erroneously inserted from some version of the magic mead story (cf. stanzas 104–110); and stanzas 143, 144, 145, and 146 are from miscellaneous sources, all, however, dealing with the general subject of runes. With stanza 147 a clearly continuous passage begins once more. <i>The windy tree</i>: the ash Yggdrasil (literally “the Horse of Othin,” so called because of this story), on which Othin, in order to win the magic runes, hanged himself as an offering to himself, and wounded himself with his own spear. Lines 5 and 6 have presumably been borrowed from <i>Svipdagsmol</i>, 30.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.141"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.141">141</a>.</span> This stanza, interrupting as it does the account of Othin’s winning the runes, appears to be an interpolation. The meaning of the stanza is most obscure. Bolthorn was Othin’s grandfather, and Bestla his mother. We do not know the name of the uncle here mentioned, but it has been suggested that this son of Bolthorn was Mimir (cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 27 and note, and 47 and note). In any case, the nine magic songs which he learned from his uncle seem to have enabled him to win the magic mead (cf. stanzas 104–110). Concerning <i>Othrörir</i>, here used as the name of the vessel containing the mead, cf. stanza 107 and note.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.143"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.143">143</a>.</span> This and the following stanza belong together, and in many editions appear as a single stanza. They presumably come from some lost poem on the authorship of the runes. Lines 2 and 3 follow line 4 in the manuscript; the transposition was suggested by Bugge. <i>The king of singers</i>: Othin. The magic signs (runes) were commonly carved in wood, then colored red.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.144"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.144">144</a>.</span> <i>Dain</i> and <i>Dvalin</i>: dwarfs; cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 14, and note. Dain, however, may here be one of the elves rather than the dwarf of that name. The two names also appear together in <i>Grimnismol</i>, 33, where they are applied to two of the four harts that nibble at the topmost twigs of Yggdrasil. <i>Alsvith</i> (“the All-Wise”) appears nowhere else as a giant’s name. <i>Myself</i>: Othin. We have no further information concerning the list of those who wrote the runes for the various races, and these four lines seem like a confusion of names in the rather hazy mind of some reciter.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.145"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.145">145</a>.</span> This Malahattr stanza appears to be a regular religious formula, concerned less with the runes which one “writes” and “tints” (cf. stanza 79) than with the prayers which one “asks” and the sacrifices which one “offers” and “sends.” Its origin is wholly uncertain, but it is clearly an interpolation here. In the manuscript the phrase “knowest?” is abbreviated after the first line.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.146"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.146">146</a>.</span> This stanza as translated here follows the manuscript reading, except in assuming a gap between lines 3 and 5. In Vigfusson and Powell’s <i lang="la">Corpus Poeticum Boreale</i> the first three lines have somehow been expanded into eight. The last two lines are almost certainly misplaced; Bugge suggests that they belong at the end of stanza 144. <i>Thund</i>: another name for Othin. <i>When home he came</i>: presumably after obtaining the runes as described in stanzas 139 and 140.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.147"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.147">147</a>.</span> With this stanza begins the <i>Ljothatal</i>, or list of charms. The magic songs themselves are not given, but in each case the peculiar application of the charm is explained. The passage, which is certainly approximately complete as far as it goes, runs to the end of the poem. In the manuscript and in most editions line 4 falls into two half-lines, running:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line">“In sickness and pain   |   and every sorrow.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first" id="n1.2.148"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.148">148</a>.</span> <i>Second</i>, etc., appear in the manuscript as Roman numerals. The manuscript indicates no gap after line 2.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.152"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.152">152</a>.</span> The sending of a root with runes written thereon was an excellent way of causing death. So died the Icelandic hero Grettir the Strong.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.156"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.156">156</a>.</span> <i>House-riders</i>: witches, who ride by night on the roofs of houses, generally in the form of wild beasts. Possibly one of the last two lines is spurious.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.157"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.157">157</a>.</span> The last line looks like an unwarranted addition, and line 4 may likewise be spurious.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.158"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.158">158</a>.</span> Lines 4–5 are probably expanded from a single line.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.159"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.159">159</a>.</span> The sprinkling of a child with water was an established custom long before Christianity brought its conception of baptism.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.161"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.161">161</a>.</span> This stanza, according to Müllenhoff, was the original conclusion of the poem, the phrase “a fifteenth” being inserted only after stanzas 162–165 had crept in. <i>Delling</i>: a seldom mentioned god who married Not (Night). Their son was Dag (Day). <i>Thjothrörir</i>: not mentioned elsewhere. <i>Hroptatyr</i>: Othin.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.163"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.163">163</a>.</span> Some editors have combined these two lines with stanza 164. Others have assumed that the gap follows the first half-line, making “so that—from me” the end of the stanza.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.164"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.164">164</a>.</span> This stanza is almost certainly an interpolation, and seems to have been introduced after the list of charms and the <i>Loddfafnismol</i> (stanzas 111–138) were combined in a single poem, for there is no other apparent excuse for the reference to Loddfafnir at this point. The words “if thou mightest get them” are a conjectural emendation.</p>
						<p id="n1.2.165"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.2.165">165</a>.</span> This stanza is almost totally obscure. The third and fourth lines look like interpolations.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
