<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 class="main">LOKASENNA</h2>
			<h2 class="sub">
				<i>Loki’s Wrangling</i>
			</h2>
			<div class="divBody">
				<div class="div2 introNote section">
					
					<div class="divHead">
						<h3 class="main">
							<span class="sc">Introductory Note</span>
						</h3>
					</div>
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first">The <i>Lokasenna</i> is found only in <i>Regius</i>, where it follows the <i>Hymiskvitha</i>; Snorri quotes four lines of it, grouped together as a single stanza.</p>
						<p>The poem is one of the most vigorous of the entire collection, and seems to have been preserved in exceptionally good condition. The exchange or contest of insults was dear to the Norse heart, and the <i>Lokasenna</i> consists chiefly of Loki’s taunts to the assembled gods and goddesses, and their largely ineffectual attempts to talk back to him. The author was evidently well versed in mythological lore, and the poem is full of references to incidents not elsewhere recorded. As to its date and origin there is the usual dispute, but the latter part of the tenth century and Iceland seem the best guesses.</p>
						<p>The prose notes are long and of unusual interest. The introductory one links the poem closely to the <i>Hymiskvitha</i>, much as the <i>Reginsmol</i>, <i>Fafnismol</i> and <i>Sigrdrifumol</i> are linked together; the others fill in the narrative gaps in the dialogue—very like stage directions,—and provide a conclusion by relating Loki’s punishment, which, presumably, is here connected with the wrong incident. It is likely that often when the poem was recited during the two centuries or so before it was committed to writing, the speaker inserted some such explanatory comments, and the compiler of the collection followed this example by adding such explanations as he thought necessary. The <i>Lokasenna</i> is certainly much older than the <i>Hymiskvitha</i>, the connection between them being purely one of subject-matter; and the twelfth-century compiler evidently knew a good deal less about mythology than the author whose work he was annotating.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="div2 section">
					
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first" id="prose1.8">Ægir, who was also called Gymir, had prepared ale for the gods, after he had got the mighty kettle, as now has been told. To this feast came Othin and Frigg, his wife. Thor came not, as he was on a journey in the East. Sif, Thor’s wife, was there, and Bragi with Ithun, his wife. Tyr, who had but one hand, was there; the wolf Fenrir had bitten off his other hand when they had bound him. There were Njorth and Skathi his wife, Freyr and Freyja, and Vithar, the son of Othin. Loki was there, and Freyr’s servants Byggvir and Beyla. Many were there of the gods and elves.</p>
						<p>Ægir had two serving-men, Fimafeng and Eldir. Glittering gold they had in place of firelight; the ale came in of itself; and great was the peace. The guests praised much the ability of Ægir’s serving-men. Loki might not endure that, and he slew Fimafeng. Then the gods shook their shields and howled at Loki and drove him away to the forest, and thereafter set to drinking again. Loki turned back, and outside he met Eldir. Loki spoke to him:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>1</a>.</span> “Speak now, Eldir,   |   for not one step</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Farther shalt thou fare;</p>
							<p class="line">What ale-talk here   |   do they have within,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The sons of the glorious gods?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Eldir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>2</a>.</span> “Of their weapons they talk,   |   and their might in war,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The sons of the glorious gods;</p>
							<p class="line">From the gods and elves   |   who are gathered here</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">No friend in words shalt thou find.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>3</a>.</span> “In shall I go   |   into Ægir’s hall,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For the feast I fain would see;</p>
							<p class="line">Bale and hatred   |   I bring to the gods,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And their mead with venom I mix.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Eldir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>4</a>.</span> “If in thou goest   |   to Ægir’s hall,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And fain the feast wouldst see,</p>
							<p class="line">And with slander and spite   |   wouldst sprinkle the gods,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Think well lest they wipe it on thee.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>5</a>.</span> “Bethink thee, Eldir,   |   if thou and I</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Shall strive with spiteful speech;</p>
							<p class="line">Richer I grow   |   in ready words</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If thou speakest too much to me.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first">Then Loki went into the hall, but when they who were there saw who had entered, they were all silent.</p>
						<p><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.6">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.6">6</a>.</span> “Thirsty I come   |   into this thine hall,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">I, Lopt, from a journey long,</p>
							<p class="line">To ask of the gods   |   that one should give</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Fair mead for a drink to me.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.7">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.7">7</a>.</span> “Why sit ye silent,   |   swollen with pride,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Ye gods, and no answer give?</p>
							<p class="line">At your feast a place   |   and a seat prepare me,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Or bid me forth to fare.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Bragi spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.8">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.8">8</a>.</span> “A place and a seat   |   will the gods prepare</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">No more in their midst for thee;</p>
							<p class="line">For the gods know well   |   what men they wish</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To find at their mighty feasts.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.9">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.9">9</a>.</span> “Remember, Othin,   |   in olden days</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That we both our blood have mixed;</p>
							<p class="line">Then didst thou promise   |   no ale to pour,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Unless it were brought for us both.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Othin spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.10">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.10">10</a>.</span> “Stand forth then, Vithar,   |   and let the wolf’s father</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Find a seat at our feast;</p>
							<p class="line">Lest evil should Loki   |   speak aloud</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Here within Ægir’s hall.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first">Then Vithar arose and poured drink for Loki; but before he drank he spoke to the gods:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>11</a>.</span> “Hail to you, gods!   |   ye goddesses, hail!</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Hail to the holy throng!</p>
							<p class="line">Save for the god   |   who yonder sits,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Bragi there on the bench.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Bragi spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>12</a>.</span> “A horse and a sword   |   from my hoard will I give,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And a ring gives Bragi to boot,</p>
							<p class="line">That hatred thou makst not   |   among the gods;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">So rouse not the great ones to wrath.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.13">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.13">13</a>.</span> “In horses and rings   |   thou shalt never be rich,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Bragi, but both shalt thou lack;</p>
							<p class="line">Of the gods and elves   |   here together met</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Least brave in battle art thou,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">(And shyest thou art of the shot.)”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Bragi spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.14">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.14">14</a>.</span> “Now were I without   |   as I am within,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And here in Ægir’s hall,</p>
							<p class="line">Thine head would I bear   |   in mine hands away,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And pay thee the price of thy lies.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.15">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.15">15</a>.</span> “In thy seat art thou bold,   |   not so are thy deeds,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Bragi, adorner of benches!</p>
							<p class="line">Go out and fight   |   if angered thou feelest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">No hero such forethought has.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Ithun spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.16">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.16">16</a>.</span> “Well, prithee, Bragi,   |   his kinship weigh,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Since chosen as wish-son he was;</p>
							<p class="line">And speak not to Loki   |   such words of spite</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Here within Ægir’s hall.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.17">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.17">17</a>.</span> “Be silent, Ithun!   |   thou art, I say,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Of women most lustful in love,</p>
							<p class="line">Since thou thy washed-bright   |   arms didst wind</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">About thy brother’s slayer.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Ithun spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>18</a>.</span> “To Loki I speak not   |   with spiteful words</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Here within Ægir’s hall;</p>
							<p class="line">And Bragi I calm,   |   who is hot with beer,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For I wish not that fierce they should fight.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Gefjun spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.19">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.19">19</a>.</span> “Why, ye gods twain,   |   with bitter tongues</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Raise hate among us here?</p>
							<p class="line">Loki is famed   |   for his mockery foul,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the dwellers in heaven he hates.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.20">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.20">20</a>.</span> “Be silent, Gefjun!   |   for now shall I say</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Who led thee to evil life;</p>
							<p class="line">The boy so fair   |   gave a necklace bright,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And about him thy leg was laid.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Othin spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.21">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.21">21</a>.</span> “Mad art thou, Loki,   |   and little of wit,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The wrath of Gefjun to rouse;</p>
							<p class="line">For the fate that is set   |   for all she sees,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Even as I, methinks.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>22</a>.</span> “Be silent, Othin!   |   not justly thou settest</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The fate of the fight among men;</p>
							<p class="line">Oft gavst thou to him   |   who deserved not the gift,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To the baser, the battle’s prize.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Othin spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.23">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.23">23</a>.</span> “Though I gave to him   |   who deserved not the gift,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To the baser, the battle’s prize;</p>
							<p class="line">Winters eight   |   wast thou under the earth,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Milking the cows as a maid,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">(Ay, and babes didst thou bear;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Unmanly thy soul must seem.)”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.24">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.24">24</a>.</span> “They say that with spells   |   in Samsey once</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Like witches with charms didst thou work;</p>
							<p class="line">And in witch’s guise   |   among men didst thou go;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Unmanly thy soul must seem.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Frigg spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.25">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.25">25</a>.</span> “Of the deeds ye two   |   of old have done</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Ye should make no speech among men;</p>
							<p class="line">Whate’er ye have done   |   in days gone by,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Old tales should ne’er be told.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.26">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.26">26</a>.</span> “Be silent, Frigg!   |   thou art Fjorgyn’s wife,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">But ever lustful in love;</p>
							<p class="line">For Vili and Ve,   |   thou wife of Vithrir,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Both in thy bosom have lain.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Frigg spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.27">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.27">27</a>.</span> “If a son like Baldr   |   were by me now,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Here within Ægir’s hall,</p>
							<p class="line">From the sons of the gods   |   thou shouldst go not forth</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Till thy fierceness in fight were tried.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>28</a>.</span> “Thou wilt then, Frigg,   |   that further I tell</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Of the ill that now I know;</p>
							<p class="line">Mine is the blame   |   that Baldr no more</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thou seest ride home to the hall.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Freyja spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.29">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.29">29</a>.</span> “Mad art thou, Loki,   |   that known thou makest</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The wrong and shame thou hast wrought;</p>
							<p class="line">The fate of all   |   does Frigg know well,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Though herself she says it not.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.30">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.30">30</a>.</span> “Be silent, Freyja!   |   for fully I know thee,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Sinless thou art not thyself;</p>
							<p class="line">Of the gods and elves   |   who are gathered here,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Each one as thy lover has lain.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Freyja spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>31</a>.</span> “False is thy tongue,   |   and soon shalt thou find</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That it sings thee an evil song;</p>
							<p class="line">The gods are wroth,   |   and the goddesses all,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And in grief shalt thou homeward go.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.32">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.32">32</a>.</span> “Be silent, Freyja!   |   thou foulest witch,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And steeped full sore in sin;</p>
							<p class="line">In the arms of thy brother   |   the bright gods caught thee</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When Freyja her wind set free.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Njorth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.33">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.33">33</a>.</span> “Small ill does it work   |   though a woman may have</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A lord or a lover or both;</p>
							<p class="line">But a wonder it is   |   that this womanish god</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Comes hither, though babes he has borne.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.34">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.34">34</a>.</span> “Be silent, Njorth;   |   thou wast eastward sent,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To the gods as a hostage given;</p>
							<p class="line">And the daughters of Hymir   |   their privy had</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When use did they make of thy mouth.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Njorth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.35">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.35">35</a>.</span> “Great was my gain,   |   though long was I gone,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To the gods as a hostage given;</p>
							<p class="line">The son did I have   |   whom no man hates,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And foremost of gods is found.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.36">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.36">36</a>.</span> “Give heed now, Njorth,   |   nor boast too high,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">No longer I hold it hid;</p>
							<p class="line">With thy sister hadst thou   |   so fair a son,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thus hadst thou no worse a hope.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Tyr spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.37">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.37">37</a>.</span> “Of the heroes brave   |   is Freyr the best</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Here in the home of the gods;</p>
							<p class="line">He harms not maids   |   nor the wives of men,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the bound from their fetters he frees.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.38">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.38">38</a>.</span> “Be silent, Tyr!   |   for between two men</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Friendship thou ne’er couldst fashion;</p>
							<p class="line">Fain would I tell   |   how Fenrir once</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thy right hand rent from thee.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Tyr spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.39">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.39">39</a>.</span> “My hand do I lack,   |   but Hrothvitnir thou,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the loss brings longing to both;</p>
							<p class="line">Ill fares the wolf   |   who shall ever await</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">In fetters the fall of the gods.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.40">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.40">40</a>.</span> “Be silent, Tyr!   |   for a son with me</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thy wife once chanced to win;</p>
							<p class="line">Not a penny, methinks,   |   wast thou paid for the wrong,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Nor wast righted an inch, poor wretch.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Freyr spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.41">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.41">41</a>.</span> “By the mouth of the river   |   the wolf remains</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Till the gods to destruction go;</p>
							<p class="line">Thou too shalt soon,   |   if thy tongue is not stilled,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Be fettered, thou forger of ill.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.42">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.42">42</a>.</span> “The daughter of Gymir   |   with gold didst thou buy,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And sold thy sword to boot;</p>
							<p class="line">But when Muspell’s sons   |   through Myrkwood ride,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thou shalt weaponless wait, poor wretch.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Byggvir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.43">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.43">43</a>.</span> “Had I birth so famous   |   as Ingunar-Freyr,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And sat in so lofty a seat,</p>
							<p class="line">I would crush to marrow   |   this croaker of ill,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And beat all his body to bits.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.44">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.44">44</a>.</span> “What little creature   |   goes crawling there,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Snuffling and snapping about?</p>
							<p class="line">At Freyr’s ears ever   |   wilt thou be found,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Or muttering hard at the mill.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Byggvir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.45">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.45">45</a>.</span> “Byggvir my name,   |   and nimble am I,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">As gods and men do grant;</p>
							<p class="line">And here am I proud   |   that the children of Hropt</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Together all drink ale.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>46</a>.</span> “Be silent, Byggvir!   |   thou never couldst set</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Their shares of the meat for men;</p>
							<p class="line">Hid in straw on the floor,   |   they found thee not</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When heroes were fain to fight.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Heimdall spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.47">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.47">47</a>.</span> “Drunk art thou, Loki,   |   and mad are thy deeds,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Why, Loki, leavst thou this not?</p>
							<p class="line">For drink beyond measure   |   will lead all men</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">No thought of their tongues to take.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>48</a>.</span> “Be silent, Heimdall!   |   in days long since</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Was an evil fate for thee fixed;</p>
							<p class="line">With back held stiff   |   must thou ever stand,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">As warder of heaven to watch.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Skathi spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.49">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.49">49</a>.</span> “Light art thou, Loki,   |   but longer thou mayst not</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">In freedom flourish thy tail;</p>
							<p class="line">On the rocks the gods bind thee   |   with bowels torn</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Forth from thy frost-cold son.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>50</a>.</span> “Though on rocks the gods bind me   |   with bowels torn</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Forth from my frost-cold son,</p>
							<p class="line">I was first and last   |   at the deadly fight</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">There where Thjazi we caught.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Skathi spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>51</a>.</span> “Wert thou first and last   |   at the deadly fight</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">There where Thjazi was caught,</p>
							<p class="line">From my dwellings and fields   |   shall ever come forth</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A counsel cold for thee.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.52">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.52">52</a>.</span> “More lightly thou spakest   |   with Laufey’s son,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When thou badst me come to thy bed;</p>
							<p class="line">Such things must be known   |   if now we two</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Shall seek our sins to tell.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first">Then Sif came forward and poured mead for Loki in a crystal cup, and said:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.53">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.53">53</a>.</span> “Hail to thee, Loki,   |   and take thou here</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The crystal cup of old mead;</p>
							<p class="line">For me at least,   |   alone of the gods,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Blameless thou knowest to be.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first">He took the horn, and drank therefrom:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.54">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.54">54</a>.</span> “Alone thou wert   |   if truly thou wouldst</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">All men so shyly shun;</p>
							<p class="line">But one do I know   |   full well, methinks,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Who had thee from Hlorrithi’s arms,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">(Loki the crafty in lies.)”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Beyla spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.55">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.55">55</a>.</span> “The mountains shake,   |   and surely I think</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">From his home comes Hlorrithi now;</p>
							<p class="line">He will silence the man   |   who is slandering here</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Together both gods and men.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>56</a>.</span> “Be silent, Beyla!   |   thou art Byggvir’s wife,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And deep art thou steeped in sin;</p>
							<p class="line">A greater shame   |   to the gods came ne’er,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Befouled thou art with thy filth.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first">Then came Thor forth, and spake:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.57">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.57">57</a>.</span> “Unmanly one, cease,   |   or the mighty hammer,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Mjollnir, shall close thy mouth;</p>
							<p class="line">Thy shoulder-cliff   |   shall I cleave from thy neck,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And so shall thy life be lost.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.58">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.58">58</a>.</span> “Lo, in has come   |   the son of Earth:</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Why threaten so loudly, Thor?</p>
							<p class="line">Less fierce thou shalt go   |   to fight with the wolf</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When he swallows Sigfather up.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Thor spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.59">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.59">59</a>.</span> “Unmanly one, cease,   |   or the mighty hammer,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Mjollnir, shall close thy mouth;</p>
							<p class="line">I shall hurl thee up   |   and out in the East,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Where men shall see thee no more.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.60">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.60">60</a>.</span> “That thou hast fared   |   on the East-road forth</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To men shouldst thou say no more;</p>
							<p class="line">In the thumb of a glove   |   didst thou hide, thou great one,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And there forgot thou wast Thor.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Thor spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.61">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.61">61</a>.</span> “Unmanly one, cease,   |   or the mighty hammer,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Mjollnir, shall close thy mouth;</p>
							<p class="line">My right hand shall smite thee   |   with Hrungnir’s slayer,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Till all thy bones are broken.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.62">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.62">62</a>.</span> “A long time still   |   do I think to live,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Though thou threatenest thus with thy hammer;</p>
							<p class="line">Rough seemed the straps   |   of Skrymir’s wallet,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When thy meat thou mightest not get,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">(And faint from hunger didst feel.)”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Thor spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>63</a>.</span> “Unmanly one, cease,   |   or the mighty hammer,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Mjollnir, shall close thy mouth;</p>
							<p class="line">The slayer of Hrungnir   |   shall send thee to hell,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And down to the gate of death.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Loki spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>64</a>.</span> “I have said to the gods   |   and the sons of the gods</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The things that whetted my thoughts;</p>
							<p class="line">But before thee alone   |   do I now go forth,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For thou fightest well, I ween.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.8.65">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.8.65">65</a>.</span> “Ale hast thou brewed,   |   but, Ægir, now</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Such feasts shalt thou make no more;</p>
							<p class="line">O’er all that thou hast   |   which is here within</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Shall play the flickering flames,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">(And thy back shall be burnt with fire.)”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first" id="prose1.8.65">And after that Loki hid himself in Franang’s waterfall in the guise of a salmon, and there the gods took him. He was bound with the bowels of his son Vali, but his son Narfi was changed to a wolf. Skathi took a poison-snake and fastened it up over Loki’s face, and the poison dropped thereon. Sigyn, Loki’s wife, sat there and held a shell under the poison, but when the shell was full she bore away the poison, and meanwhile the poison dropped on Loki. Then he struggled so hard that the whole earth shook therewith; and now that is called an earthquake.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="div2 endNotes last-child section">
					
					<div class="divHead">
						<h3 class="main">NOTES</h3>
						<p>
							
						</p>
					</div>
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first"><i><a class="pginternal" href="#prose1.8">Prose</a>.</i> <i>Ægir</i>: the sea-god; Snorri gives Hler as another of his names, but he is not elsewhere called Gymir, which is the name of the giant, Gerth’s father, in the <i>Skirnismol</i>. On Ægir cf. <i>Grimnismol</i>, 45, and <i>Hymiskvitha</i>, 1. <i>Frigg</i>: though Othin’s wife is often mentioned, she plays only a minor part in the Eddic poems; cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 34, <i>Vafthruthnismol</i>, 1, and <i>Grimnismol</i>, introductory prose. <i>Thor</i>: the compiler is apparently a trifle confused as to Thor’s movements; the “journey in the East” here mentioned cannot be the one described in the <i>Hymiskvitha</i>, nor yet the one narrated by Snorri, as Loki was with Thor throughout that expedition. He probably means no more than that Thor was off killing giants. <i>Sif</i>: concerning Thor’s wife the chief incident is that Loki cut off her hair, and, at the command of the wrathful Thor, was compelled to have the dwarfs fashion her a new supply of hair out of gold; cf. <i>Harbarthsljoth</i>, 48. <i>Bragi</i>: the god of poetry; cf. <i>Grimnismol</i>, 44 and note. <i>Ithun</i>: the goddess of youth; cf. note on <i>Skirnismol</i>, 19. Ithun is not mentioned by name in any other of the Eddic poems, but Snorri tells in detail how the giant Thjazi stole her and her apples, explaining the reference in <i>Harbarthsljoth</i>, 19 (q. v.). <i>Tyr</i>: the god of battle; cf. <i>Hymiskvitha</i>, 4, and (concerning his dealings with the wolf Fenrir) <i>Voluspo</i>, 39, note. <i>Njorth</i>: the chief of the Wanes, and father of <i>Freyr</i> and <i>Freyja</i>; cf. (concerning the whole family) <i>Skirnismol</i>, introductory prose and note, also <i>Voluspo</i>, 21 and note. <i>Skathi</i>: Njorth’s wife was the daughter of the giant Thjazi; cf. <i>Harbarthsljoth</i>, 19, note, and <i>Grimnismol</i>, 11. <i>Vithar</i>: the silent god, the son of Othin who avenged his father by slaying the wolf Fenrir; cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 54, <i>Vafthruthnismol</i>, 51, and <i>Grimnismol</i>, 17. <i>Loki</i>: the mischief-making fire-god; in addition to the many references to his career in the <i>Lokasenna</i>, cf. particularly <i>Voluspo</i>, 32 and 35, and notes. <i>Byggvir</i> and <i>Beyla</i>: not mentioned elsewhere in the poems; Freyr’s conspicuous servant is Skirnir, hero of the <i>Skirnismol</i>. <i>Fimafeng</i> (“The Swift Handler”) and <i>Eldir</i> (“The Man of the Fire”): mentioned only in connection with this incident. <i>Glittering gold</i>: Ægir’s use of gold to light his hall, which was often thought of as under the sea, was responsible for the phrase “flame of the flood,” and sundry kindred phrases, meaning “gold.”</p>
						<p id="n1.8.6"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.6">6</a>.</span> <i>Lopt</i>: like Lothur (cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 18) another name for Loki; cf. <i>Hyndluljoth</i>, 43, and Svipdagsmol, 42.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.7"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.7">7</a>.</span> In the manuscript this stanza begins with a small letter, and Heinzel unites it with stanza 6.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.8"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.8">8</a>.</span> <i>Bragi</i>: cf. note on introductory prose. Why Loki taunts him with cowardice (stanzas 11–13–15) is not clear, for poetry, of which Bragi was the patron, was generally associated in the Norse mind with peculiar valor, and most of the skaldic poets were likewise noted fighters.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.9"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.9">9</a>.</span> There exists no account of any incident in which Othin and Loki thus swore blood-brotherhood, but they were so often allied in enterprises that the idea is wholly reasonable. The common process of “mingling blood” was carried out quite literally, and the promise of which Loki speaks is characteristic of those which, in the sagas, often accompanied the ceremony; cf. <i>Brot af Sigurtharkvithu</i>, 18 and note.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.10"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.10">10</a>.</span> In stanzas 10–31 the manuscript has nothing to indicate the identity of the several speakers, but these are uniformly clear enough through the context. <i>Vithar</i>: cf. note on introductory prose. <i>The wolf’s father</i>: Loki; cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 39 and note.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.13"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.13">13</a>.</span> Sijmons makes one line of lines 4–5 by cutting out a part of each; Finnur Jonsson rejects 5 as spurious.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.14"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.14">14</a>.</span> The text of line 4 is somewhat obscure, and has been variously emended, one often adopted suggestion making the line read, “Little is that for thy lies.”</p>
						<p id="n1.8.15"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.15">15</a>.</span> <i>Adorner of benches</i>: this epithet presumably implies that Bragi is not only slothful, but also effeminate, for a very similar word, “pride of the benches,” means a bride.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.16"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.16">16</a>.</span> <i>Ithun</i>: Bragi’s wife; cf. note on introductory prose. The goddesses who, finding that their husbands are getting the worst of it, take up the cudgels with Loki, all find themselves confronted with undeniable facts in their own careers; cf. stanzas 26 (Frigg), 52 (Skathi) and 54 (Sif). Gefjun and Freyja are silenced in similar fashion. <i>Wish-son</i>: adopted son; Loki was the son of the giant Farbauti and the giantess Laufey, and hence was not of the race of the gods, but had been virtually adopted by Othin, who subsequently had good reason to regret it.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.17"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.17">17</a>.</span> We do not even know who Ithun’s brother was, much less who slew him.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.19"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.19">19</a>.</span> <i>Gefjun</i>: a goddess, not elsewhere mentioned in the poems, who, according to Snorri, was served by the women who died maidens. Beyond this nothing is known of her. Lines 3–4 in the manuscript are puzzling, and have been freely emended.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.20"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.20">20</a>.</span> Nothing is known of the incident here mentioned. There is a good deal of confusion as to various of the gods and goddesses, and it has been suggested that Gefjun is really Frigg under another name, with a little of Freyja—whose attributes were frequently confused with Frigg’s—thrown in. Certainly Othin’s answer (stanza 21, lines 3–4) fits Frigg perfectly, for she shared his knowledge of the future, whereas it has no relation to anything known of Gefjun. As for the necklace (line 3), it may be the Brisings’ necklace, which appears in the <i>Thrymskvitha</i> as Freyja’s, but which, in some mythological writings, is assigned to Frigg.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.21"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.21">21</a>.</span> Snorri quotes line 1; cf. note on stanza 29.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.23"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.23">23</a>.</span> There is no other reference to Loki’s having spent eight years underground, or to his cow-milking. On one occasion, however, he did bear offspring. A giant had undertaken to build the gods a fortress, his reward being Freyja and the sun and moon, provided the work was done by a given time. His sole helper was his horse, Svathilfari. The work being nearly done, and the gods fearing to lose Freyja and the sun and moon, Loki turned himself into a mare, and so effectually distracted Svathilfari from his task that shortly afterwards Loki gave birth to Othin’s eight-legged horse, Sleipnir. In such contests of abuse a man was not infrequently taunted with having borne children; cf. <i>Helgakvitha Hundingsbana</i> I, 39–45. One or two of the last three lines may be spurious.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.24"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.24">24</a>.</span> <i>Samsey</i>: perhaps the Danish island of Samsö. Othin was the god of magic, but there is no other reference to his ever having disguised himself as a witch.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.25"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.25">25</a>.</span> <i>Frigg</i>: Othin’s wife; cf. note to introductory prose.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.26"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.26">26</a>.</span> <i>Fjorgyn</i>: Othin; cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 56 and note. <i>Vili</i> and <i>Ve</i>: Othin’s brothers, who appear merely as, with Othin, the sons of Bur and Bestla; cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 4. The <i>Ynglingasaga</i> says that, during one of Othin’s protracted absences, his two brothers took Frigg as their mistress. <i>Vithrir</i>: another name for Othin.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.27"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.27">27</a>.</span> On the death of Baldr, slain through Loki’s cunning by the blind Hoth, cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 32 and note.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.29"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.29">29</a>.</span> <i>Freyja</i>: daughter of Njorth and sister of Freyr; cf. note on introductory prose. Snorri, in speaking of Frigg’s knowledge of the future, makes a stanza out of <i>Lokasenna</i>, 21, 1; 47, 2; 29, 3–4, thus: “Mad art thou, Loki,   |   and little of wit, / Why, Loki, leavst thou this not? / The fate of all   |   does Frigg know well, / Though herself she says it not.”</p>
						<p id="n1.8.30"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.30">30</a>.</span> According to Snorri, Freyja was a model of fidelity to her husband, Oth.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.32"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.32">32</a>.</span> Before each of stanzas 32–42 the manuscript indicates the speaker, through the initial letter of the name written in the margin. <i>Thy brother</i>: Freyr; there is no other indication that such a relation existed between these two, but they themselves were the product of such a union; cf. stanza 36 and note.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.33"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.33">33</a>.</span> <i>Njorth</i>: father of Freyr and Freyja, and given by the Wanes as a hostage, in exchange for Hönir, at the close of the first war; cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 21 and note, also <i>Skirnismol</i>, introductory prose and note. <i>Babes</i>: cf. stanza 23 and note. Bugge suggests that this clause may have been a late insertion.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.34"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.34">34</a>.</span> <i>Daughters of Hymir</i>: we have no clue to who these were, though Hymir is doubtless the frost-giant of the <i>Hymiskvitha</i> (q.v.). Loki’s point is that Njorth is not a god, but the product of an inferior race (the Wanes).</p>
						<p id="n1.8.35"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.35">35</a>.</span> <i>The son</i>: Freyr.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.36"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.36">36</a>.</span> <i>Thy sister</i>: the <i>Ynglingasaga</i> supports this story of Njorth’s having had two children by his sister before he came among the gods. Snorri, on the other hand, specifically says that Freyr and Freyja were born after Njorth came to the gods.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.37"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.37">37</a>.</span> <i>Tyr</i>: the god of battle; cf. notes on <i>Hymiskvitha</i>, 4, and <i>Voluspo</i>, 39. <i>Freyr</i>; concerning his noble qualities cf. <i>Skirnismol</i>, introductory prose and note.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.38"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.38">38</a>.</span> Snorri mentions Tyr’s incompetence as a peacemaker. <i>Fenrir</i>: the wolf, Loki’s son; cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 39.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.39"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.39">39</a>.</span> <i>Hrothvitnir</i> (“The Mighty Wolf”): Fenrir, who awaits in chains the final battle and death at the hands of Vithar. The manuscript has a metrical error in line 3, which has led to various emendations, all with much the same meaning.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.40"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.40">40</a>.</span> <i>Thy wife</i>: there is no other reference to Tyr’s wife, nor do we know who was the son in question.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.41"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.41">41</a>.</span> <i>The mouth of the river</i>: according to Snorri, the chained Fenrir “roars horribly, and the slaver runs from his mouth, and makes the river called Vam; he lies there till the doom of the gods.” Freyr’s threat is actually carried out; cf. concluding prose.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.42"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.42">42</a>.</span> <i>The daughter of Gymir</i>: Gerth, heroine of the <i>Skirnismol</i>, which gives the details of Freyr’s loss of his sword. <i>Muspell’s sons</i>: the name Muspell is not used elsewhere in the poems; Snorri uses it frequently, but only in this same phrase, “Muspell’s sons.” They are the dwellers in the fire-world, Muspellsheim, led by Surt against the gods in the last battle; cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 47 and 52 and notes. <i>Myrkwood</i>: here the dark forest bounding the fire-world; in the <i>Atlakvitha</i> (stanza 3) the name is used of another boundary forest.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.43"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.43">43</a>.</span> <i>Byggvir</i>: one of Freyr’s two servants; cf. introductory prose. <i>Ingunar-Freyr</i>: the name is not used elsewhere in the poems, or by Snorri; it may be the genitive of a woman’s name, Ingun, the unknown sister of Njorth who was Freyr’s mother (cf. stanza 36), or a corruption of the name Ingw, used for Freyr (Fro) in old German mythology.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.44"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.44">44</a>.</span> Beginning with this stanza, the names of the speakers are lacking in the manuscript. <i>The mill</i>: i.e., at slaves’ tasks.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.45"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.45">45</a>.</span> Nothing further is known of either Byggvir’s swiftness or his cowardice. <i>Hropt</i>: Othin.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.47"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.47">47</a>.</span> <i>Heimdall</i>: besides being the watchman of the gods (cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 27), he appears also as the god of light (cf. <i>Thrymskvitha</i>, 14), and possibly also as a complex cultural deity in the <i>Rigsthula</i>. He was a son of Othin, born of nine sisters; cf. <i>Hyndluljoth</i>, 37–40. In the last battle he and Loki slay one another. Line 2 is quoted by Snorri; cf. stanza 29, note.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.49"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.49">49</a>.</span> <i>Skathi</i>: the wife of Njorth, and daughter of the giant Thjazi, concerning whose death cf. <i>Harbarthsljoth</i>, 19, note. <i>Bowels</i>, etc.: according to the prose note at the end of the <i>Lokasenna</i>, the gods bound Loki with the bowels of his son Vali, and changed his other son, Narfi, into a wolf. Snorri turns the story about, Vali being the wolf, who tears his brother to pieces, the gods then using Narfi’s intestines to bind Loki. Narfi—and presumably Vali—were the sons of Loki and his wife, Sigyn. They appear only in this episode, though Narfi (or Nari) is named by Snorri in his list of Loki’s children. Cf. concluding prose, and note.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.52"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.52">52</a>.</span> <i>Laufey’s son</i>: Loki; not much is known of his parents beyond their names. His father was the giant Farbauti, his mother Laufey, sometimes called Nal. There is an elaborate but far-fetched hypothesis explaining these three on the basis of a nature-myth. There is no other reference to such a relation between Skathi and Loki as he here suggests.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.53"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.53">53</a>.</span> <i>Sif</i>: Thor’s wife; cf. <i>Harbarthsljoth</i>, 48, where her infidelity is again mentioned. The manuscript omits the proper name from the preceding prose, and a few editors have, obviously in error, attributed the speech to Beyla.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.54"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.54">54</a>.</span> <i>Hlorrithi</i>: Thor. Line 5 is probably spurious.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.55"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.55">55</a>.</span> <i>Beyla</i>: Freyr’s servant, wife of Byggvir; cf. introductory prose and note.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.57"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.57">57</a>.</span> <i>Mjollnir</i>: concerning Thor’s famous hammer see particularly <i>Thrymskvitha</i>, 1 and note. <i>Shoulder-cliff</i>: head; concerning the use of such diction in the <i>Edda</i>, cf. introductory note to <i>Hymiskvitha</i>. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, but this is apparently a scribal error.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.58"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.58">58</a>.</span> <i>Son of Earth</i>: Thor, son of Othin and Jorth (Earth). The manuscript omits the word “son,” but all editors have agreed in supplying it. <i>The wolf</i>: Fenrir, Loki’s son, who slays Othin (<i>Sigfather</i>: “Father of Victory”) in the final battle. Thor, according to Snorri and to the <i>Voluspo</i>, 56, fights with Mithgarthsorm and not with Fenrir, who is killed by Vithar.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.59"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.59">59</a>.</span> Lines 1–2 are abbreviated in the manuscript, as also in stanzas 61 and 63.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.60"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.60">60</a>.</span> Loki’s taunt that Thor hid in the thumb of Skrymir’s glove is similar to that of Othin, <i>Harbarthsljoth</i>, 26, in the note to which the story is outlined. Line 4 is identical with line 3 of <i>Harbarthsljoth</i>, 26.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.61"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.61">61</a>.</span> <i>Hrungnir’s slayer</i>: the hammer; the story of how Thor slew this stone-headed giant is indicated in <i>Harbarthsljoth</i>, 14–15, and outlined in the note to stanza 14 of that poem.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.62"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.62">62</a>.</span> On the day following the adventure of the glove, Thor, Loki and Thor’s servants proceed on their way in company with Skrymir, who puts all their food in his wallet. At evening Skrymir goes to sleep, and Thor tries to get at the food, but cannot loosen the straps of the wallet. In a rage he smites Skrymir three times on the head with his hammer, but the giant—who, it subsequently appears, deftly dodges the blows—is totally undisturbed. Line 5 may well be spurious.</p>
						<p id="n1.8.65"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.8.65">65</a>.</span> <i>The flames</i>: the fire that consumes the world on the last day; cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 57. Line 5 may be spurious.</p>
						<p><i><a class="pginternal" href="#prose1.8.65">Prose</a></i>: Snorri tells the same story, with minor differences, but makes it the consequence of Loki’s part in the slaying of Baldr, which undoubtedly represents the correct tradition. The compiler of the poems either was confused or thought the incident was useful as indicating what finally happened to Loki. Possibly he did not mean to imply that Loki’s fate was brought upon him by his abuse of the gods, but simply tried to round out the story. <i>Franang</i>: “Gleaming Water.” <i>Vali</i> and <i>Narfi</i>: cf. stanza 49 and note. <i>Sigyn</i>: cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 35, the only other place where she is mentioned in the poems. Snorri omits the naive note about earthquakes, his narrative ending with the words, “And there he lies till the destruction of the gods.”</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
