<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 class="main">SIGRDRIFUMOL</h2>
			<h2 class="sub">
				<i>The Ballad of The Victory-Bringer</i>
			</h2>
			<div class="divBody">
				<div class="div2 introNote section">
					
					<div class="divHead">
						<h3 class="main">
							<span class="sc">Introductory Note</span>
						</h3>
					</div>
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first">The so-called <i>Sigrdrifumol</i>, which immediately follows the <i>Fafnismol</i> in the <i lang="la">Codex Regius</i> without any indication of a break, and without separate title, is unquestionably the most chaotic of all the poems in the Eddic collection. The end of it has been entirely lost, for the fifth folio of eight sheets is missing from <i>Regius</i>, the gap coming after the first line of stanza 29 of this poem. That stanza has been completed, and eight more have been added, from much later paper manuscripts, but even so the conclusion of the poem is in obscurity.</p>
						<p>Properly speaking, however, the strange conglomeration of stanzas which the compiler of the collection has left for us, and which, in much the same general form, seems to have lain before the authors of the <i>Volsungasaga</i>, in which eighteen of its stanzas are quoted, is not a poem at all. Even its customary title is an absurd error. The mistake made by the annotator in thinking that the epithet “sigrdrifa,” rightly applied to Brynhild as a “bringer of victory,” was a proper name has already been explained and commented on (note on <i>Fafnismol</i>, 44). Even if the collection of stanzas were in any real sense a poem, which it emphatically is not, it is certainly not the “Ballad of Sigrdrifa” which it is commonly called. “Ballad of Brynhild” would be a sufficiently suitable title, and I have here brought the established name “Sigrdrifumol” into accord with this by translating the epithet instead of treating it as a proper name.</p>
						<p>Even apart from the title, however, the <i>Sigrdrifumol</i> has little claim to be regarded as a distinct poem, nor is there any indication that the compiler did so regard it. Handicapped as we are by the loss of the concluding section, and of the material which followed it on those missing pages, we can yet see that the process which began with the prose <i>Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i>, and which, interrupted by the insertion of the <i>Gripisspo</i>, went on through the <i>Reginsmol</i> and the <i>Fafnismol</i>, continued through as much of the <i>Sigrdrifumol</i> as is left to us. In other words, the compiler told the story of Sigurth in mixed prose and verse, using whatever verse he could find without much questioning as to its origin, and filling in the gaps with his own prose. <i>Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i>, <i>Reginsmol</i>, <i>Fafnismol</i>, and <i>Sigrdrifumol</i> are essentially a coherent unit, but one of the compiler’s making only; they represent neither one poem nor three distinct poems, and the divisions and titles which have been almost universally adopted by editors are both arbitrary and misleading.</p>
						<p>The <i>Sigrdrifumol</i> section as we now have it is an extraordinary piece of patchwork. It is most unlikely that the compiler himself brought all these fragments together for the first time; little by little, through a process of accretion and also, unluckily, through one of elimination, the material grew into its present shape. Certainly the basis of it is a poem dealing with the finding of Brynhild by Sigurth, but of this original poem only five stanzas (2–4 and 20–21) can be identified with any degree of confidence. To these five stanzas should probably, however, be added some, if not all, of the passage (stanzas 6–12) in which Brynhild teaches Sigurth the magic runes. These stanzas of rune-lore attracted sundry similar passages from other sources, including stanza 5, in which a magic draught is administered (not necessarily by Brynhild or to Sigurth), the curious rune-chant in stanzas 15–17, and stanzas 13–14 and 18–19. Beginning with stanza 22, and running to the end of the fragment (stanza 37), is a set of numbered counsels closely resembling the <i>Loddfafnismol</i> (<i>Hovamol</i>, stanzas 111–138), which manifestly has nothing whatever to do with Brynhild. Even in this passage there are probably interpolations (stanzas 25, 27, 30, 34, and 36). Finally, and bespeaking the existence at some earlier time of another Sigurth-Brynhild poem, is stanza 1, sharply distinguished by its metrical form from stanzas 2–4 and 20–21. Many critics argue that stanzas 6–10 of <i>Helreith Brynildar</i> belonged originally to the same poem as stanza 1 of the <i>Sigrdrifumol</i>.</p>
						<p>The <i>Sigrdrifumol</i>, then, must be regarded simply as a collection of fragments, most of them originally having no relation to the main subject. All of the story, the dialogue and the characterization are embodied in stanzas 1–4 and 20–21 and in the prose notes accompanying the first four stanzas; all of the rest might equally well (or better) be transferred to the <i>Hovamol</i>, where its character entitles it to a place. Yet stanzas 2–4 are as fine as anything in Old Norse poetry, and it is out of the scanty material of these three stanzas that Wagner constructed much of the third act of “Siegfried.”</p>
						<p>The <i>Sigrdrifumol</i> represents almost exclusively the contributions of the North to the Sigurth tradition (cf. introductory note to the <i>Gripisspo</i>). Brynhild, here disguised by the annotator as “Sigrdrifa,” appears simply as a battle-maid and supernatural dispenser of wisdom; there is no trace of the daughter of Buthli and the rival of Guthrun. There is, however, so little of the “poem” which can definitely be assigned to the Sigurth cycle that it is impossible to trace back any of the underlying narrative substance.</p>
						<p>The nature and condition of the material have made editorial conjectures and emendations very numerous, and as most of the guesses are neither conclusive nor particularly important, only a few of them are mentioned in the notes.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="div2 section">
					
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first" id="prose2.9">Sigurth rode up on Hindarfjoll and turned southward toward the land of the Franks. On the mountain he saw a great light, as if fire were burning, and the glow reached up to heaven. And when he came thither, there stood a tower of shields, and above it was a banner. Sigurth went into the shield-tower, and saw that a man lay there sleeping with all his war-weapons. First he took the helm from his head, and then he saw that it was a woman. The mail-coat was as fast as if it had grown to the flesh. Then he cut the mail-coat from the head-opening downward, and out to both the arm-holes. Then he took the mail-coat from her, and she awoke, and sat up and saw Sigurth, and said:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.1">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.1">1</a>.</span> “What bit through the byrnie?   |   how was broken my sleep?</p>
							<p class="line">Who made me free   |   of the fetters pale?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>He answered</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line">“Sigmund’s son,   |   with Sigurth’s sword,</p>
							<p class="line">That late with flesh   |   hath fed the ravens.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first" id="prose2.9.1">Sigurth sat beside her and asked her name. She took a horn full of mead and gave him a memory-draught.</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.2">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.2">2</a>.</span> “Hail, day!   |   Hail, sons of day!</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And night and her daughter now!</p>
							<p class="line">Look on us here   |   with loving eyes,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That waiting we victory win.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>3</a>.</span> “Hail to the gods!   |   Ye goddesses, hail,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And all the generous earth!</p>
							<p class="line">Give to us wisdom   |   and goodly speech,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And healing hands, life-long.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>4</a>.</span> “Long did I sleep,   |   my slumber was long,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And long are the griefs of life;</p>
							<p class="line">Othin decreed   |   that I could not break</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The heavy spells of sleep.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first" id="prose2.9.4">Her name was Sigrdrifa, and she was a Valkyrie. She said that two kings fought in battle; one was called Hjalmgunnar, an old man but a mighty warrior, and Othin had promised him the victory, and</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line">The other was Agnar,   |   brother of Autha,</p>
							<p class="line">None he found   |   who fain would shield him.</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first">Sigrdrifa slew Hjalmgunnar in the battle, and Othin pricked her with the sleep-thorn in punishment for this, and said that she should never thereafter win victory in battle, but that she should be wedded. “And I said to him that I had made a vow in my turn, that I would never marry a man who knew the meaning of fear.” Sigurth answered and asked her to teach him wisdom, if she knew of what took place in all the worlds. Sigrdrifa said:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.5">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.5">5</a>.</span> “Beer I bring thee,   |   tree of battle,</p>
							<p class="line">Mingled of strength   |   and mighty fame;</p>
							<p class="line">Charms it holds   |   and healing signs,</p>
							<p class="line">Spells full good,   |   and gladness-runes.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first verseStars">*    *    *    *    *    *</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.6">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.6">6</a>.</span> Winning-runes learn,   |   if thou longest to win,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the runes on thy sword-hilt write;</p>
							<p class="line">Some on the furrow,   |   and some on the flat,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And twice shalt thou call on Tyr.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.7">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.7">7</a>.</span> Ale-runes learn,   |   that with lies the wife</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Of another betray not thy trust;</p>
							<p class="line">On the horn thou shalt write,   |   and the backs of thy hands,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And Need shalt mark on thy nails.</p>
							<p class="line">Thou shalt bless the draught,   |   and danger escape,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And cast a leek in the cup;</p>
							<p class="line">(For so I know   |   thou never shalt see</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thy mead with evil mixed.)</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>8</a>.</span> Birth-runes learn,   |   if help thou wilt lend,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The babe from the mother to bring;</p>
							<p class="line">On thy palms shalt write them,   |   and round thy joints,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And ask the fates to aid.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.9">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.9">9</a>.</span> Wave-runes learn,   |   if well thou wouldst shelter</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The sail-steeds out on the sea;</p>
							<p class="line">On the stem shalt thou write,   |   and the steering-blade,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And burn them into the oars;</p>
							<p class="line">Though high be the breakers,   |   and black the waves,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thou shalt safe the harbor seek.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.10">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.10">10</a>.</span> Branch-runes learn,   |   if a healer wouldst be,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And cure for wounds wouldst work;</p>
							<p class="line">On the bark shalt thou write,   |   and on trees that be</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">With boughs to the eastward bent.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.11">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.11">11</a>.</span> Speech-runes learn,   |   that none may seek</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To answer harm with hate;</p>
							<p class="line">Well he winds   |   and weaves them all,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And sets them side by side,</p>
							<p class="line">At the judgment-place,   |   when justice there</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The folk shall fairly win.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.12">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.12">12</a>.</span> Thought-runes learn,   |   if all shall think</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thou art keenest minded of men.</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first verseStars">*    *    *    *    *    *</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.13">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.13">13</a>.</span> Them Hropt arranged,   |   and them he wrote,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And them in thought he made,</p>
							<p class="line">Out of the draught   |   that down had dropped</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">From the head of Heithdraupnir,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the horn of Hoddrofnir.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.14">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.14">14</a>.</span> On the mountain he stood   |   with Brimir’s sword,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">On his head the helm he bore;</p>
							<p class="line">Then first the head   |   of Mim spoke forth,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And words of truth it told.</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first verseStars">*    *    *    *    *    *</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.15">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.15">15</a>.</span> He bade write on the shield   |   before the shining goddess,</p>
							<p class="line">On Arvak’s ear,   |   and on Alsvith’s hoof,</p>
							<p class="line">On the wheel of the car   |   of Hrungnir’s killer,</p>
							<p class="line">On Sleipnir’s teeth,   |   and the straps of the sledge.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.16">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.16">16</a>.</span> On the paws of the bear,   |   and on Bragi’s tongue,</p>
							<p class="line">On the wolf’s claws bared,   |   and the eagle’s beak,</p>
							<p class="line">On bloody wings,   |   and bridge’s end,</p>
							<p class="line">On freeing hands   |   and helping foot-prints.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.17">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.17">17</a>.</span> On glass and on gold,   |   and on goodly charms,</p>
							<p class="line">In wine and in beer,   |   and on well-loved seats,</p>
							<p class="line">On Gungnir’s point,   |   and on Grani’s breast,</p>
							<p class="line">On the nails of Norns,   |   and the night-owl’s beak.</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first verseStars">*    *    *    *    *    *</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.18">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.18">18</a>.</span> Shaved off were the runes   |   that of old were written,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And mixed with the holy mead,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And sent on ways so wide;</p>
							<p class="line">So the gods had them,   |   so the elves got them,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And some for the Wanes so wise,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And some for mortal men.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.19">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.19">19</a>.</span> Beech-runes are there,   |   birth-runes are there,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And all the runes of ale,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the magic runes of might;</p>
							<p class="line">Who knows them rightly   |   and reads them true,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Has them himself to help;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Ever they aid,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Till the gods are gone.</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first verseStars">*    *    *    *    *    *</p>
						<p><i>Brynhild spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.20">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.20">20</a>.</span> “Now shalt thou choose,   |   for the choice is given,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thou tree of the biting blade;</p>
							<p class="line">Speech or silence,   |   ’tis thine to say,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Our evil is destined all.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Sigurth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.21">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.21">21</a>.</span> “I shall not flee,   |   though my fate be near,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">I was born not a coward to be;</p>
							<p class="line">Thy loving word   |   for mine will I win,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">As long as I shall live.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first verseStars">*    *    *    *    *    *</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.22">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.22">22</a>.</span> Then first I rede thee,   |   that free of guilt</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Toward kinsmen ever thou art;</p>
							<p class="line">No vengeance have,   |   though they work thee harm,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Reward after death thou shalt win.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.23">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.23">23</a>.</span> Then second I rede thee,   |   to swear no oath</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If true thou knowest it not;</p>
							<p class="line">Bitter the fate   |   of the breaker of troth,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And poor is the wolf of his word.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>24</a>.</span> Then third I rede thee,   |   that thou at the Thing</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Shalt fight not in words with fools;</p>
							<p class="line">For the man unwise   |   a worser word</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Than he thinks doth utter oft.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.25">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.25">25</a>.</span> Ill it is   |   if silent thou art,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A coward born men call thee,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And truth mayhap they tell;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Seldom safe is fame,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Unless wide renown be won;</p>
							<p class="line">On the day thereafter   |   send him to death,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Let him pay the price of his lies.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>26</a>.</span> Then fourth I rede thee,   |   if thou shalt find</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A wily witch on thy road,</p>
							<p class="line">It is better to go   |   than her guest to be,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Though night enfold thee fast.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.27">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.27">27</a>.</span> Eyes that see   |   need the sons of men</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Who fight in battle fierce;</p>
							<p class="line">Oft witches evil   |   sit by the way,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Who blade and courage blunt.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.28">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.28">28</a>.</span> Then fifth I rede thee,   |   though maidens fair</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thou seest on benches sitting,</p>
							<p class="line">Let the silver of kinship   |   not rob thee of sleep,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the kissing of women beware.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.29">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.29">29</a>.</span> Then sixth I rede thee,   |   if men shall wrangle,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And ale-talk rise to wrath,</p>
							<p class="line">No words with a drunken   |   warrior have,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For wine steals many men’s wits.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.30">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.30">30</a>.</span> Brawls and ale   |   full oft have been</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">An ill to many a man,</p>
							<p class="line">Death for some,   |   and sorrow for some;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Full many the woes of men.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.31">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.31">31</a>.</span> Then seventh I rede thee,   |   if battle thou seekest</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">With a foe that is full of might;</p>
							<p class="line">It is better to fight   |   than to burn alive</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">In the hall of the hero rich.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>32</a>.</span> Then eighth I rede thee,   |   that evil thou shun,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And beware of lying words;</p>
							<p class="line">Take not a maid,   |   nor the wife of a man,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Nor lure them on to lust.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>33</a>.</span> Then ninth I rede thee:   |   burial render</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If thou findest a fallen corpse,</p>
							<p class="line">Of sickness dead,   |   or dead in the sea,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Or dead of weapons’ wounds.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.34">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.34">34</a>.</span> A bath shalt thou give them   |   who corpses be,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And hands and head shalt wash;</p>
							<p class="line">Wipe them and comb,   |   ere they go in the coffin,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And pray that they sleep in peace.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.35">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.35">35</a>.</span> Then tenth I rede thee,   |   that never thou trust</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The word of the race of wolves,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">(If his brother thou broughtest to death,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Or his father thou didst fell;)</p>
							<p class="line">Often a wolf   |   in a son there is,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Though gold he gladly takes.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.36">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.36">36</a>.</span> Battle and hate   |   and harm, methinks,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Full seldom fall asleep;</p>
							<p class="line">Wits and weapons   |   the warrior needs</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If boldest of men he would be.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg2.9.37">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n2.9.37">37</a>.</span> Then eleventh I rede thee,   |   that wrath thou shun,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And treachery false with thy friends;</p>
							<p class="line">Not long the leader’s   |   life shall be,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For great are the foes he faces.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="div2 endNotes last-child section">
					
					<div class="divHead">
						<h3 class="main">NOTES</h3>
						<p>
							
						</p>
					</div>
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first"><i><a class="pginternal" href="#prose2.9">Prose</a>.</i> The introductory prose follows without break the prose concluding the <i>Fafnismol</i>, the point of division being arbitrary and not agreed upon by all editors. <i>Hindarfjoll</i>: cf. <i>Fafnismol</i>, 42 and note. <i>Franks</i>: this does not necessarily mean that Sigurth was on his way to the Gjukungs’ home, for Sigmund had a kingdom in the land of the Franks (cf. <i>Fra Dautha Sinfjotla</i>). <i>Shields</i>: the annotator probably drew the notion of the shield-tower from the reference in <i>Helreith Brynhildar</i>, 9. The flame-girt tower was not uncommon; cf. Mengloth’s hall in <i>Svipdagsmol</i>.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.1"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.1">1</a>.</span> This stanza, and the two lines included in the prose after stanza 4, and possibly stanza 5 as well, evidently come from a different poem from stanzas 2–4. Lines 3–4 in the original are obscure, though the general meaning is clear.</p>
						<p><i><a class="pginternal" href="#prose2.9.1">Prose</a></i> (after stanza 1). In the manuscript stanza 4 stands before this prose note and stanzas 2–3. The best arrangement of the stanzas seems to be the one here given, following Müllenhoff’s suggestion, but the prose note is out of place anywhere. The first sentence of it ought to follow stanza 4 and immediately precede the next prose note; the second sentence ought to precede stanza 5.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.2"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.2">2</a>.</span> <i>Sons of day</i>: the spirits of light. <i>The daughter of night</i> (Not), according to Snorri, was Jorth (Earth).</p>
						<p><i><a class="pginternal" href="#prose2.9.4">Prose</a></i> (after stanza 4). <i>Sigrdrifa</i>: on the error whereby this epithet, “victory-bringer,” became a proper name cf. <i>Fafnismol</i>, 44 and note. <i>Hjalmgunnar</i>: in <i>Helreith Brynhildar</i> (stanza 8) he is called a king of the Goths, which means little; of him and his adversary, <i>Agnar</i>, we know nothing beyond what is told here. The two lines quoted apparently come from the same poem as stanza 1; the two first lines of the stanza have been reconstructed from the prose thus: “Hjalmgunnar was one,   |   the hoary king, / And triumph to him   |   had Heerfather promised.” A few editions insert in this prose passage stanzas 7–10 of <i>Helreith Brynhildar</i>, which may or may not have belonged originally to this poem.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.5"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.5">5</a>.</span> This stanza is perhaps, but by no means surely, from the same poem as stanza 1. <i>Tree of battle</i>: warrior. <i>Runes</i>: the earliest runes were not letters, but simply signs supposed to possess magic power; out of them developed the “runic alphabet.”</p>
						<p id="n2.9.6"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.6">6</a>.</span> Stanzas 6–12 give a list of runes which probably had no original connection with the Brynhild-Sigurth story. <i>Tyr</i>: the sword-god (cf. <i>Hymiskvitha</i>, 4 and note); “tyr” is also the name of a rune which became “T.”</p>
						<p id="n2.9.7"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.7">7</a>.</span> <i>Regius</i> gives only lines 1–6; lines 7–8 are added from <i>Volsungasaga</i>. <i>Lies</i>, etc.: a guest on his arrival received a draught of ale from the hands of his host’s wife, and it was to prevent this draught from bewitching him that the runes were recommended. <i>Need</i>: the word “nauth,” meaning “need,” is also the name of the rune which became “N.” <i>Leek</i>: leeks were long supposed to have the power of counteracting poison or witchcraft.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.9"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.9">9</a>.</span> <i>Sail-steeds</i>: ships.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.10"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.10">10</a>.</span> <i>Branch-runes</i>: runes cut in the bark of trees. Such runes were believed to transfer sickness from the invalid to the tree. Some editors, however, have changed “limrunar” (“branch-runes”) to “lifrunar” (“life-runes”).</p>
						<p id="n2.9.11"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.11">11</a>.</span> Lines 3–6 look like an accidental addition, replacing two lines now lost. They mean, apparently, that the man who interweaves his speech with “speech-runes” when he pleads his case at the “Thing,” or popular tribunal, will not unduly enrage his adversary in the argument of the case.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.12"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.12">12</a>.</span> Here the list of runes breaks off, though the manuscript indicates no gap, and three short passages of a different type, though all dealing with runes, follow.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.13"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.13">13</a>.</span> Stanzas 13–14 appear to have come from a passage regarding Othin’s getting of the runes similar to <i>Hovamol</i>, 139–146. Editors have tried various combinations of the lines in stanzas 12–14. <i>Hropt</i>: Othin; cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 62. <i>The draught</i>, etc.: apparently the reference is to the head of Mim, from which Othin derived his wisdom in magic (cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 47 and note); <i>Heithdraupnir</i> (“Light-Dropper”) and <i>Hoddrofnir</i> (“Treasure-Opener”) seem to be names for Mim.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.14"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.14">14</a>.</span> This stanza is clearly in bad shape; perhaps, as the manuscript indicates, a new stanza, of which most has been lost, should begin with line 3. <i>Brimir</i>: a giant (cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 9 and 37); why Othin should have his sword is unknown.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.15"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.15">15</a>.</span> Stanzas 15–17 constitute a wholly distinct rune-chant. Line 1 is unusually long in the original, as here. <i>Shield</i>: the shield Svalin (“Cooling”) that stands in front of the sun; cf. <i>Grimnismol</i>, 38. <i>Arvak</i> (“Early Walter”) and <i>Alsvith</i> (“All-Swift”): the horses that draw the sun’s car; cf. <i>Grimnismol</i>, 37. <i>Hrungnir</i>: the slayer of the giant Hrungnir was Thor (cf. <i>Harbarthsljoth</i>, 14 and note), but the line is in bad shape; the name may not be Hrungnir, and “killer” is a conjectural addition. <i>Sleipnir</i>: Othin’s eight-legged horse; cf. <i>Grimnismol</i>, 44 and note. <i>Sledge</i>: perhaps the one mentioned in <i>Grimnismol</i>, 49.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.16"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.16">16</a>.</span> <i>Bragi</i>: the god of poetry; cf. <i>Grimnismol</i>, 44 and note.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.17"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.17">17</a>.</span> <i>Charms</i>: the wearing of amulets was very common. <i>Gungnir</i>: Othin’s spear, made by the dwarfs, which he occasionally lent to heroes to whom he granted victory. <i>Grani</i>: Sigurth’s horse; the <i>Volsungasaga</i> has “giantesses’.”</p>
						<p id="n2.9.18"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.18">18</a>.</span> Stanzas 18–19, which editors have freely rearranged, apparently come from another source than any of the rest. <i>Shaved off</i>: the runes were shaved off by Othin from the wood on which they were carved, and the shavings bearing them were put into the magic mead. <i>Wanes</i>: cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 21, note.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.19"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.19">19</a>.</span> Lines 3, 6, and 7 look like spurious additions, but the whole stanza is chaotic. <i>Beech-runes</i>: runes carved on beech-trees.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.20"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.20">20</a>.</span> Stanzas 20–21 are all that remains of the dialogue between Brynhild and Sigurth from the poem to which stanzas 2–4 belong; cf. Introductory Note. In the intervening lost stanzas Brynhild has evidently warned Sigurth of the perils that will follow if he swears loyalty to her; hence the choice to which she here refers. <i>Tree</i>, etc.: warrior. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker of either this or the following stanza; the <i>Volsungasaga</i> names Sigurth before stanza 21.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.21"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.21">21</a>.</span> It is quite possible that the original poem concluded with two stanzas after this, paraphrased thus in the <i>Volsungasaga</i>: “Sigurth said: ‘Nowhere is to be found any one wiser than thou, and this I swear, that I shall have thee for mine, and that thou art after my heart’s desire.’ She answered: ‘I would rather have thee though I might choose among all men.’ And this they bound between them with oaths.” Stanzas 22–37, which the <i>Volsungasaga</i> paraphrases, may have been introduced at a relatively early time, but can hardly have formed part of the original poem.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.22"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.22">22</a>.</span> With this stanza begins the list of numbered counsels, closely resembling the <i>Loddfafnismol</i> (<i>Hovamol</i>, 111–138), here attributed to Brynhild. That the section originally had anything to do with Brynhild is more than improbable.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.23"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.23">23</a>.</span> <i>Wolf of his word</i>: oath-destroyer, oath-breaker.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.25"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.25">25</a>.</span> This chaotic and obscure jumble of lines has been unsuccessfully “improved” by various editors. It is clearly an interpolation, meaning, in substance: “It is dangerous to keep silent too long, as men may think you a coward; but if any one taunts you falsely because of your silence, do not argue with him, but the next morning kill him as proof that he is a liar.”</p>
						<p id="n2.9.27"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.27">27</a>.</span> Probably another interpolation.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.28"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.28">28</a>.</span> <i>Silver of kinship</i>: the passage is doubtful, but apparently it means the “marriage-price” for which a bride was “bought.”</p>
						<p id="n2.9.29"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.29">29</a>.</span> Line 1 comes at the end of the thirty-second leaf of <i>Regius</i>, and whatever further was contained in that manuscript has vanished with the lost eight-leaf folio (cf. Introductory Note). The rest of stanza 29, and stanzas 30–37, are added from later paper manuscripts, which were undoubtedly copied from an old parchment, though probably not from the complete <i>Regius</i>. The <i>Volsungasaga</i> paraphrases these additional stanzas.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.30"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.30">30</a>.</span> Probably an interpolation.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.31"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.31">31</a>.</span> The meaning is that it is better to go forth to battle than to stay at home and be burned to death. Many a Norse warrior met his death in this latter way; the burning of the house in the <i>Njalssaga</i> is the most famous instance.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.34"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.34">34</a>.</span> Probably an interpolation.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.35"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.35">35</a>.</span> Lines 3–4 are probably interpolated. <i>Race of wolves</i>: family of a slain foe.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.36"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.36">36</a>.</span> Probably an interpolation.</p>
						<p id="n2.9.37"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg2.9.37">37</a>.</span> Lines 3–4 may well have come from the old Sigurth-Brynhild poem, like stanzas 2–4 and 20–21, being inserted here, where they do not fit particularly well, in place of the two lines with which the eleventh counsel originally ended. Perhaps they formed part of the stanza of warning which evidently preceded Brynhild’s speech in stanza 20. In the <i>Volsungasaga</i> they are paraphrased at the end of Brynhild’s long speech of advice (stanzas 20–37), and are immediately followed by the prose passage given in the note on stanza 21. It seems likely, therefore, that the paper manuscripts have preserved all of the so-called <i>Sigrdrifumol</i> which was contained in the lost section of <i>Regius</i>, with the possible exception of these two concluding stanzas, and these may very well have been given only in the form of a prose note, though it is practically certain that at one time they existed in verse form.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
