<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 class="main">SKIRNISMOL</h2>
			<h2 class="main">
				<i>The Ballad of Skirnir</i>
			</h2>
			<div class="divBody">
				<div class="div2 introNote section">
					
					<div class="divHead">
						<h3 class="main">
							<span class="sc">Introductory Note</span>
						</h3>
					</div>
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first">The <i>Skirnismol</i> is found complete in the <i lang="la">Codex Regius</i>, and through stanza 27 in the <i>Arnamagnæan Codex</i>. Snorri quotes the concluding stanza. In <i>Regius</i> the poem is entitled “For Scirnis” (“Skirnir’s Journey”).</p>
						<p>The <i>Skirnismol</i> differs sharply from the poems preceding it, in that it has a distinctly ballad quality. As a matter of fact, however, its verse is altogether dialogue, the narrative being supplied in the prose “links,” concerning which cf. introductory note to the <i>Grimnismol</i>. The dramatic effectiveness and vivid characterization of the poem seem to connect it with the <i>Thrymskvitha</i>, and the two may possibly have been put into their present form by the same man. Bugge’s guess that the <i>Skirnismol</i> was the work of the author of the <i>Lokasenna</i> is also possible, though it has less to support it.</p>
						<p>Critics have generally agreed in dating the poem as we now have it as early as the first half of the tenth century; Finnur Jonsson puts it as early as 900, and claims it, as usual, for Norway. Doubtless it was current in Norway, in one form or another, before the first Icelandic settlements, but his argument that the thistle (stanza 31) is not an Icelandic plant has little weight, for such curse-formulas must have traveled freely from place to place. In view of the evidence pointing to a western origin for many or all of the Eddic poems, Jonsson’s reiterated “<span lang="no">Digtet er sikkert norsk og ikke islandsk</span>” is somewhat exasperating. Wherever the <i>Skirnismol</i> was composed, it has been preserved in exceptionally good condition, and seems to be practically devoid of interpolations or lacunæ.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="div2 section">
					
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first" id="p1.5.prose">Freyr, the son of Njorth, had sat one day in Hlithskjolf, and looked over all the worlds. He looked into Jotunheim, and saw there a fair maiden, as she went from her father’s house to her bower. Forthwith he felt a mighty love-sickness. Skirnir was the name of Freyr’s servant; Njorth bade him ask speech of Freyr. He said:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.1">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.1">1</a>.</span> “Go now, Skirnir!   |   and seek to gain</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Speech from my son;</p>
							<p class="line">And answer to win,   |   for whom the wise one</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Is mightily moved.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Skirnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>2</a>.</span> “Ill words do I now   |   await from thy son,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If I seek to get speech with him,</p>
							<p class="line">And answer to win,   |   for whom the wise one</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Is mightily moved.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Skirnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>3</a>.</span> “Speak prithee, Freyr,   |   foremost of the gods,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now I fain would know;</p>
							<p class="line">Why sittest thou here   |   in the wide halls,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Days long, my prince, alone?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Freyr spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.4">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.4">4</a>.</span> “How shall I tell thee,   |   thou hero young,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Of all my grief so great?</p>
							<p class="line">Though every day   |   the elfbeam dawns,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">It lights my longing never.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Skirnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>5</a>.</span> “Thy longings, methinks,   |   are not so large</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That thou mayst not tell them to me;</p>
							<p class="line">Since in days of yore   |   we were young together,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">We two might each other trust.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Freyr spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.6">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.6">6</a>.</span> “From Gymir’s house   |   I beheld go forth</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A maiden dear to me;</p>
							<p class="line">Her arms glittered,   |   and from their gleam</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Shone all the sea and sky.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.7">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.7">7</a>.</span> “To me more dear   |   than in days of old</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Was ever maiden to man;</p>
							<p class="line">But no one of gods   |   or elves will grant</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That we both together should be.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Skirnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.8">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.8">8</a>.</span> “Then give me the horse   |   that goes through the dark</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And magic flickering flames;</p>
							<p class="line">And the sword as well   |   that fights of itself</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Against the giants grim.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Freyr spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>9</a>.</span> “The horse will I give thee   |   that goes through the dark</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And magic flickering flames,</p>
							<p class="line">And the sword as well   |   that will fight of itself</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If a worthy hero wields it.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Skirnir spake to the horse</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.10">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.10">10</a>.</span> “Dark is it without,   |   and I deem it time</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To fare through the wild fells,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">(To fare through the giants’ fastness;)</p>
							<p class="line">We shall both come back,   |   or us both together</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The terrible giant will take.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first">Skirnir rode into Jotunheim to Gymir’s house. There were fierce dogs bound before the gate of the fence which was around Gerth’s hall. He rode to where a herdsman sat on a hill, and said:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>11</a>.</span> “Tell me, herdsman,   |   sitting on the hill,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And watching all the ways,</p>
							<p class="line">How may I win   |   a word with the maid</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Past the hounds of Gymir here?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>The herdsman spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.12">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.12">12</a>.</span> “Art thou doomed to die   |   or already dead,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thou horseman that ridest hither?</p>
							<p class="line">Barred from speech   |   shalt thou ever be</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">With Gymir’s daughter good.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Skirnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.13">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.13">13</a>.</span> “Boldness is better   |   than plaints can be</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For him whose feet must fare;</p>
							<p class="line">To a destined day   |   has mine age been doomed,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And my life’s span thereto laid.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Gerth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>14</a>.</span> “What noise is that   |   which now so loud</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">I hear within our house?</p>
							<p class="line">The ground shakes,   |   and the home of Gymir</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Around me trembles too.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>The Serving-Maid spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.15">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.15">15</a>.</span> “One stands without   |   who has leapt from his steed,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And lets his horse loose to graze;”</p>
							<p class="line">.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Gerth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.16">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.16">16</a>.</span> “Bid the man come in,   |   and drink good mead</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Here within our hall;</p>
							<p class="line">Though this I fear,   |   that there without</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">My brother’s slayer stands.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.17">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.17">17</a>.</span> “Art thou of the elves   |   or the offspring of gods,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Or of the wise Wanes?</p>
							<p class="line">How camst thou alone   |   through the leaping flame</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thus to behold our home?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Skirnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.18">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.18">18</a>.</span> “I am not of the elves,   |   nor the offspring of gods,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Nor of the wise Wanes;</p>
							<p class="line">Though I came alone   |   through the leaping flame</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thus to behold thy home.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.19">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.19">19</a>.</span> “Eleven apples,   |   all of gold,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Here will I give thee, Gerth,</p>
							<p class="line">To buy thy troth   |   that Freyr shall be</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Deemed to be dearest to you.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Gerth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>20</a>.</span> “I will not take   |   at any man’s wish</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">These eleven apples ever;</p>
							<p class="line">Nor shall Freyr and I   |   one dwelling find</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">So long as we two live.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Skirnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.21">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.21">21</a>.</span> “Then do I bring thee   |   the ring that was burned</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Of old with Othin’s son;</p>
							<p class="line">From it do eight   |   of like weight fall</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">On every ninth night.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Gerth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>22</a>.</span> “The ring I wish not,   |   though burned it was</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Of old with Othin’s son;</p>
							<p class="line">In Gymir’s home   |   is no lack of gold</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">In the wealth my father wields.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Skirnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>23</a>.</span> “Seest thou, maiden,   |   this keen, bright sword</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That I hold here in my hand?</p>
							<p class="line">Thy head from thy neck   |   shall I straightway hew,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If thou wilt not do my will.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Gerth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>24</a>.</span> “For no man’s sake   |   will I ever suffer</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To be thus moved by might;</p>
							<p class="line">But gladly, methinks,   |   will Gymir seek</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To fight if he finds thee here.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Skirnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.25">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.25">25</a>.</span> “Seest thou, maiden,   |   this keen, bright sword</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That I hold here in my hand?</p>
							<p class="line">Before its blade   |   the old giant bends,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thy father is doomed to die.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.26">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.26">26</a>.</span> “I strike thee, maid,   |   with my magic staff,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To tame thee to work my will;</p>
							<p class="line">There shalt thou go   |   where never again</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The sons of men shall see thee.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.27">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.27">27</a>.</span> “On the eagle’s hill   |   shalt thou ever sit,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And gaze on the gates of Hel;</p>
							<p class="line">More loathsome to thee   |   than the light-hued snake</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To men, shall thy meat become.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.28">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.28">28</a>.</span> “Fearful to see,   |   if thou comest forth,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Hrimnir will stand and stare,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">(Men will marvel at thee;)</p>
							<p class="line">More famed shalt thou grow   |   than the watchman of the gods!</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Peer forth, then, from thy prison.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.29">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.29">29</a>.</span> “Rage and longing,   |   fetters and wrath,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Tears and torment are thine;</p>
							<p class="line">Where thou sittest down   |   my doom is on thee</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Of heavy heart</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And double dole.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.30">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.30">30</a>.</span> “In the giants’ home   |   shall vile things harm thee</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Each day with evil deeds;</p>
							<p class="line">Grief shalt thou get   |   instead of gladness,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And sorrow to suffer with tears.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.31">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.31">31</a>.</span> “With three-headed giants   |   thou shalt dwell ever,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Or never know a husband;</p>
							<p class="line">(Let longing grip thee,   |   let wasting waste thee,—)</p>
							<p class="line">Be like to the thistle   |   that in the loft</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Was cast and there was crushed.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.32">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.32">32</a>.</span> “I go to the wood,   |   and to the wet forest,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To win a magic wand;</p>
							<p class="line">.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">I won a magic wand.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.33">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.33">33</a>.</span> “Othin grows angry,   |   angered is the best of the gods,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Freyr shall be thy foe,</p>
							<p class="line">Most evil maid,   |   who the magic wrath</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Of gods hast got for thyself.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.34">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.34">34</a>.</span> “Give heed, frost-rulers,   |   hear it, giants,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Sons of Suttung,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And gods, ye too,</p>
							<p class="line">How I forbid   |   and how I ban</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The meeting of men with the maid,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">(The joy of men with the maid.)</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.35">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.35">35</a>.</span> “Hrimgrimnir is he,   |   the giant who shall have thee</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">In the depth by the doors of Hel;</p>
							<p class="line">To the frost-giants’ halls   |   each day shalt thou fare,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Crawling and craving in vain,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">(Crawling and having no hope.)</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.36">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.36">36</a>.</span> “Base wretches there   |   by the root of the tree</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Will hold for thee horns of filth;</p>
							<p class="line">A fairer drink   |   shalt thou never find,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Maid, to meet thy wish,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">(Maid, to meet my wish.)</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.37">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.37">37</a>.</span> “I write thee a charm   |   and three runes therewith,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Longing and madness and lust;</p>
							<p class="line">But what I have writ   |   I may yet unwrite</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If I find a need therefor.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Gerth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>38</a>.</span> “Find welcome rather,   |   and with it take</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The frost-cup filled with mead;</p>
							<p class="line">Though I did not believe   |   that I should so love</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Ever one of the Wanes.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Skirnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>39</a>.</span> “My tidings all   |   must I truly learn</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Ere homeward hence I ride:</p>
							<p class="line">How soon thou wilt   |   with the mighty son</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Of Njorth a meeting make.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Gerth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.40">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.40">40</a>.</span> “Barri there is,   |   which we both know well,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A forest fair and still;</p>
							<p class="line">And nine nights hence   |   to the son of Njorth</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Will Gerth there grant delight.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first">Then Skirnir rode home. Freyr stood without, and spoke to him, and asked for tidings:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>41</a>.</span> “Tell me, Skirnir,   |   ere thou take off the saddle,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Or farest forward a step:</p>
							<p class="line">What hast thou done   |   in the giants’ dwelling</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To make glad thee or me?”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Skirnir spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.42">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.42">42</a>.</span> “Barri there is,   |   which we both know well,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A forest fair and still;</p>
							<p class="line">And nine nights hence   |   to the son of Njorth</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Will Gerth there grant delight.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Freyr spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.5.43">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.5.43">43</a>.</span> “Long is one night,   |   longer are two;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">How then shall I bear three?</p>
							<p class="line">Often to me   |   has a month seemed less</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Than now half a night of desire.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="div2 endNotes last-child section">
					
					<div class="divHead">
						<h3 class="main">NOTES</h3>
						<p>
							
						</p>
					</div>
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first"><i><a class="pginternal" href="#p1.5.prose">Prose</a>.</i> <i>Freyr</i>: concerning his father, Njorth, and the race of the Wanes in general, cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 21 and note. Snorri thus describes Njorth’s family: “Njorth begat two children in Noatun; the son was named Freyr, and the daughter Freyja; they were fair of aspect and mighty. Freyr is the noblest of the gods; he rules over rain and sunshine, and therewith the fruitfulness of the earth; it is well to call upon him for plenty and welfare, for he rules over wealth for mankind. Freyja is the noblest of the goddesses. When she rides to the fight, she has one-half of the slain, and Othin has half. When she goes on a journey, she drives her two cats, and sits in a cart. Love-songs please her well, and it is good to call on her in love-matters.” <i>Hlithskjolf</i>: Othin’s watch-tower; cf. <i>Grimnismol</i>, introductory prose. <i>He said</i>: both manuscripts have “Then Skathi said:” (Skathi was Njorth’s wife), but Bugge’s emendation, based on Snorri’s version, is doubtless correct.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.1"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.1">1</a>.</span> <i>My son</i>: both manuscripts, and many editors, have “our son,” which, of course, goes with the introduction of Skathi in the prose. As the stanza is clearly addressed to Skirnir, the change of pronouns seems justified. The same confusion occurs in stanza 2, where Skirnir in the manuscripts is made to speak of Freyr as “your son” (plural). The plural pronoun in the original involves a metrical error, which is corrected by the emendation.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.4"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.4">4</a>.</span> <i>Elfbeam</i>: the sun, so called because its rays were fatal to elves and dwarfs; cf. <i>Alvissmol</i>, 35.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.6"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.6">6</a>.</span> <i>Gymir</i>: a mountain-giant, husband of Aurbotha, and father of Gerth, fairest among women. This is all Snorri tells of him in his paraphrase of the story.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.7"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.7">7</a>.</span> Snorri’s paraphrase of the poem is sufficiently close so that his addition of another sentence to Freyr’s speech makes it probable that a stanza has dropped out between 7 and 8. This has been tentatively reconstructed, thus: “Hither to me   |   shalt thou bring the maid, / And home shalt thou lead her here, / If her father wills it   |   or wills it not, / And good reward shalt thou get.” Finn Magnusen detected the probable omission of a stanza here as early as 1821.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.8"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.8">8</a>.</span> <i>The sword</i>: Freyr’s gift of his sword to Skirnir eventually proves fatal, for at the last battle, when Freyr is attacked by Beli, whom he kills bare-handed, and later when the fire-demon, Surt, slays him in turn, he is weaponless; cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 53 and note. <i>Against the giants grim</i>: the condition of this line makes it seem like an error in copying, and it is possible that it should be identical with the fourth line of the next stanza.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.10"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.10">10</a>.</span> Some editors reject line 3 as spurious.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.12"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.12">12</a>.</span> Line 2 is in neither manuscript, and no gap is indicated. I have followed Grundtvig’s conjectural emendation.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.13"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.13">13</a>.</span> This stanza is almost exactly like many in the first part of the <i>Hovamol</i>, and may well have been a separate proverb. After this stanza the scene shifts to the interior of the house.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.15"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.15">15</a>.</span> No gap indicated in either manuscript. Bugge and Niedner have attempted emendations, while Hildebrand suggests that the last two lines of stanza 14 are spurious, 14, 1–2, and 15 thus forming a single stanza, which seems doubtful.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.16"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.16">16</a>.</span> <i>Brother’s slayer</i>: perhaps the brother is Beli, slain by Freyr; the only other references are in <i>Voluspo</i>, 53, and in Snorri’s paraphrase of the <i>Skirnismol</i>, which merely says that Freyr’s gift of his sword to Skirnir “was the reason why he was weaponless when he met Beli, and he killed him bare-handed.” Skirnir himself seems never to have killed anybody.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.17"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.17">17</a>.</span> <i>Wise Wanes</i>: cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 21 and note.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.18"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.18">18</a>.</span> The <i>Arnamagnæan Codex</i> omits this stanza.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.19"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.19">19</a>.</span> <i>Apples</i>: the apple was the symbol of fruitfulness, and also of eternal youth. According to Snorri, the goddess Ithun had charge of the apples which the gods ate whenever they felt themselves growing old.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.21"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.21">21</a>.</span> <i>Ring</i>: the ring Draupnir (“Dropper”) was made by the dwarfs for Othin, who laid it on Baldr’s pyre when the latter’s corpse was burned (cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 32 and note, and <i>Baldrs Draumar</i>). Baldr, however, sent the ring back to Othin from hell. How Freyr obtained it is nowhere stated. Andvari’s ring (Andvaranaut) had a similar power of creating gold; cf. <i>Reginsmol</i>, prose after stanza 4 and note. Lines 3 and 4 of this stanza, and the first two of stanza 22, are missing in the <i>Arnamagnæan Codex</i>.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.25"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.25">25</a>.</span> The first two lines are abbreviated in both manuscripts.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.26"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.26">26</a>.</span> With this stanza, bribes and threats having failed, Skirnir begins a curse which, by the power of his magic staff, is to fall on Gerth if she refuses Freyr.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.27"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.27">27</a>.</span> <i>Eagle’s hill</i>: the hill at the end of heaven, and consequently overlooking hell, where the giant Hræsvelg sits “in an eagle’s guise,” and makes the winds with his wings; cf. <i>Vafthruthnismol</i>, 37, also <i>Voluspo</i>, 50. The second line is faulty in both manuscripts; Hildebrand’s emendation corrects the error, but omits an effective touch; the manuscript line may be rendered “And look and hanker for hell.” The <i>Arnamagnæan Codex</i> breaks off with the fourth line of this stanza.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.28"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.28">28</a>.</span> <i>Hrimnir</i>: a frost-giant, mentioned elsewhere only in <i>Hyndluljoth</i>, 33. Line 3 is probably spurious. <i>Watchman of the gods</i>: Heimdall; cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 46.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.29"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.29">29</a>.</span> Three nouns of doubtful meaning, which I have rendered <i>rage</i>, <i>longing</i>, and <i>heart</i> respectively, make the precise force of this stanza obscure. Niedner and Sijmons mark the entire stanza as interpolated, and Jonsson rejects line 5.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.30"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.30">30</a>.</span> In <i>Regius</i> and in nearly all the editions the first two lines of this stanza are followed by lines 3–5 of stanza 35. I have followed Niedner, Sijmons, and Gering. The two words here translated <i>vile things</i> are obscure; Gering renders the phrase simply “Kobolde.”</p>
						<p id="n1.5.31"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.31">31</a>.</span> The confusion noted as to the preceding stanza, and a metrical error in the third line, have led to various rearrangements and emendations; line 3 certainly looks like an interpolation. <i>Three-headed giants</i>: concerning giants with numerous heads, cf. <i>Vafthruthnismol</i>, 33, and <i>Hymiskvitha</i>, 8.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.32"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.32">32</a>.</span> No gap indicated in the manuscript; Niedner makes the line here given as 4 the first half of line 3, and fills out the stanza thus: “with which I will tame you, / Maid, to work my will.” The whole stanza seems to be either interpolated or out of place; it would fit better after stanza 25.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.33"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.33">33</a>.</span> Jonsson marks this stanza as interpolated. The word translated <i>most evil</i> is another case of guesswork.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.34"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.34">34</a>.</span> Most editors reject line 3 as spurious, and some also reject line 6. Lines 2 and 3 may have been expanded out of a single line running approximately “Ye gods and Suttung’s sons.” <i>Suttung</i>: concerning this giant cf. <i>Hovamol</i>, 104 and note.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.35"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.35">35</a>.</span> Most editors combine lines 1–2 with stanza 36 (either with the first two lines thereof or the whole stanza), as lines 3–5 stand in the manuscript after line 2 of stanza 30. <i>Hrimgrimnir</i> (“The Frost-Shrouded”): a giant not elsewhere mentioned. Line 5, as a repetition of line 4, is probably a later addition.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.36"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.36">36</a>.</span> For the combination of this stanza with the preceding one, cf. note on stanza 35. The scribe clearly did not consider that the stanza began with line 1, as the first word thereof in the manuscript does not begin with a capital letter and has no period before it. The first word of line 3, however, is so marked. Line 5 may well be spurious.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.37"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.37">37</a>.</span> Again the scribe seems to have been uncertain as to the stanza divisions. This time the first line is preceded by a period, but begins with a small letter. Many editors have made line 2 into two half-lines. <i>A charm</i>: literally, the rune Thurs (þ); the runic letters all had magic attributes; cf. <i>Sigrdrifumol</i>, 6–7 and notes.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.40"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.40">40</a>.</span> <i>Barri</i>: “The Leafy.”</p>
						<p id="n1.5.42"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.42">42</a>.</span> Abbreviated to initial letters in the manuscript.</p>
						<p id="n1.5.43"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.5.43">43</a>.</span> The superscription is lacking in <i>Regius</i>. Snorri quotes this one stanza in his prose paraphrase, <i>Gylfaginning</i>, chapter 37. The two versions are substantially the same, except that Snorri makes the first line read, “Long is one night,   |   long is the second.”</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
