<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 class="main">SVIPDAGSMOL</h2>
			<h2 class="sub">
				<i>The Ballad of Svipdag</i>
			</h2>
			<div class="divBody">
				<div class="div2 introNote section">
					
					<div class="divHead">
						<h3 class="main">
							<span class="sc">Introductory Note</span>
						</h3>
					</div>
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first">The two poems, <i>Grougaldr</i> (<i>Groa’s Spell</i>) and <i>Fjolsvinnsmol</i> (the <i>Ballad of Fjolsvith</i>), which many editors have, very wisely, united under the single title of <i>Svipdagsmol</i>, are found only in paper manuscripts, none of them antedating the seventeenth century. Everything points to a relatively late origin for the poems: their extensive use of “kennings” or poetical circumlocutions, their romantic spirit, quite foreign to the character of the unquestionably older poems, the absence of any reference to them in the earlier documents, the frequent errors in mythology, and, finally, the fact that the poems appear to have been preserved in unusually good condition. Whether or not a connecting link of narrative verse joining the two parts has been lost is an open question; on the whole it seems likely that the story was sufficiently well known so that the reciter of the poem (or poems) merely filled in the gap with a brief prose summary in pretty much his own words. The general relationship between dialogue and narrative in the Eddic poems is discussed in the introductory note to the <i>Grimnismol</i>, in connection with the use of prose links.</p>
						<p>The love story of Svipdag and Mengloth is not referred to elsewhere in the <i>Poetic Edda</i>, nor does Snorri mention it; however, Groa, who here appears as Svipdag’s mother, is spoken of by Snorri as a wise woman, the wife of Orvandil, who helps Thor with her magic charms. On the other hand, the essence of the story, the hero’s winning of a bride ringed about by flames, is strongly suggestive of parts of the Sigurth-Brynhild traditions. Whether or not it is to be regarded as a nature or solar myth depends entirely on one’s view of the whole “solar myth” school of criticism, not so highly esteemed today as formerly; such an interpretation is certainly not necessary to explain what is, under any circumstances, a very charming romance told, in the main, with dramatic effectiveness.</p>
						<p>In later years the story of Svipdag and Mengloth became popular throughout the North, and was made the subject of many Danish and Swedish as well as Norwegian ballads. These have greatly assisted in the reconstruction of the outlines of the narrative surrounding the dialogue poems here given.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="div2 section">
					
					<div class="divHead">
						<p>
							
						</p>
					</div>
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first">I. GROUGALDR</p>
						<p>
							<span class="sc">Groa’s Spell</span>
						</p>
						<p><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.1">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.1">1</a>.</span> “Wake thee, Groa!   |   wake, mother good!</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">At the doors of the dead I call thee;</p>
							<p class="line">Thy son, bethink thee,   |   thou badst to seek</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thy help at the hill of death.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Groa spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>2</a>.</span> “What evil vexes   |   mine only son,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">What baleful fate hast thou found,</p>
							<p class="line">That thou callest thy mother,   |   who lies in the mould,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the world of the living has left?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.3">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.3">3</a>.</span> “The woman false   |   whom my father embraced</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Has brought me a baleful game;</p>
							<p class="line">For she bade me go forth   |   where none may fare,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And Mengloth the maid to seek.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Groa spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>4</a>.</span> “Long is the way,   |   long must thou wander,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">But long is love as well;</p>
							<p class="line">Thou mayst find, perchance,   |   what thou fain wouldst have,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If the fates their favor will give.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>5</a>.</span> “Charms full good   |   then chant to me, mother,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And seek thy son to guard;</p>
							<p class="line">For death do I fear   |   on the way I shall fare,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And in years am I young, methinks.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Groa spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.6">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.6">6</a>.</span> “Then first I will chant thee   |   the charm oft-tried,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That Rani taught to Rind;</p>
							<p class="line">From the shoulder whate’er   |   mislikes thee shake,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For helper thyself shalt thou have.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.7">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.7">7</a>.</span> “Then next I will chant thee,   |   if needs thou must travel,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And wander a purposeless way:</p>
							<p class="line">The bolts of Urth   |   shall on every side</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Be thy guards on the road thou goest.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.8">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.8">8</a>.</span> “Then third I will chant thee,   |   if threatening streams</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The danger of death shall bring:</p>
							<p class="line">Yet to Hel shall turn   |   both Horn and Ruth,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And before thee the waters shall fail.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>9</a>.</span> “Then fourth I will chant thee,   |   if come thy foes</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">On the gallows-way against thee:</p>
							<p class="line">Into thine hands   |   shall their hearts be given,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And peace shall the warriors wish.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.10">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.10">10</a>.</span> “Then fifth I will chant thee,   |   if fetters perchance</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Shall bind thy bending limbs:</p>
							<p class="line">O’er thy thighs do I chant   |   a loosening-charm,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the lock is burst from the limbs,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the fetters fall from the feet.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>11</a>.</span> “Then sixth I will chant thee,   |   if storms on the sea</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Have might unknown to man:</p>
							<p class="line">Yet never shall wind   |   or wave do harm,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And calm is the course of thy boat.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>12</a>.</span> “Then seventh I chant thee,   |   if frost shall seek</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To kill thee on lofty crags:</p>
							<p class="line">The fatal cold   |   shall not grip thy flesh,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And whole thy body shall be.</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.13">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.13">13</a>.</span> “Then eighth will I chant thee,   |   if ever by night</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thou shalt wander on murky ways:</p>
							<p class="line">Yet never the curse   |   of a Christian woman</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">From the dead shall do thee harm.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>14</a>.</span> “Then ninth will I chant thee,   |   if needs thou must strive</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">With a warlike giant in words:</p>
							<p class="line">Thy heart good store   |   of wit shall have,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And thy mouth of words full wise.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>15</a>.</span> “Now fare on the way   |   where danger waits,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Let evils not lessen thy love!</p>
							<p class="line">I have stood at the door   |   of the earth-fixed stones,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The while I chanted thee charms.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.16">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.16">16</a>.</span> “Bear hence, my son,   |   what thy mother hath said,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And let it live in thy breast;</p>
							<p class="line">Thine ever shall be   |   the best of fortune,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">So long as my words shall last.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first">II. FJOLSVINNSMOL</p>
						<p>
							<span class="sc">The Lay of Fjolsvith</span>
						</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.17">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.17">17</a>.</span> Before the house   |   he beheld one coming</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To the home of the giants high.</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line">“What giant is here,   |   in front of the house,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And around him fires are flaming?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>18</a>.</span> “What seekest thou here?   |   for what is thy search?</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">What, friendless one, fain wouldst thou know?</p>
							<p class="line">By the ways so wet   |   must thou wander hence,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For, weakling, no home hast thou here.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>19</a>.</span> “What giant is here,   |   in front of the house,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To the wayfarer welcome denying?”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line">“Greeting full fair   |   thou never shalt find,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">So hence shalt thou get thee home.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>20</a>.</span> “Fjolsvith am I,   |   and wise am I found,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">But miserly am I with meat;</p>
							<p class="line">Thou never shalt enter   |   within the house,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Go forth like a wolf on thy way!”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>21</a>.</span> “Few from the joy   |   of their eyes will go forth,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When the sight of their loves they seek;</p>
							<p class="line">Full bright are the gates   |   of the golden hall,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And a home shall I here enjoy.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.22">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.22">22</a>.</span> “Tell me now, fellow,   |   what father thou hast,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And the kindred of whom thou camst.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line">“Vindkald am I,   |   and Varkald’s son,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And Fjolkald his father was.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>23</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">Who is it that holds   |   and has for his own</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The rule of the hall so rich?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.24">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.24">24</a>.</span> “Mengloth is she,   |   her mother bore her</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To the son of Svafrthorin;</p>
							<p class="line">She is it that holds   |   and has for her own</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The rule of the hall so rich.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>25</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">What call they the gate?   |   for among the gods</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Ne’er saw man so grim a sight.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.26">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.26">26</a>.</span> “Thrymgjol they call it;   |   ’twas made by the three,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The sons of Solblindi;</p>
							<p class="line">And fast as a fetter   |   the farer it holds,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Whoever shall lift the latch.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>27</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">What call they the house?   |   for no man beheld</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">‘Mongst the gods so grim a sight.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.28">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.28">28</a>.</span> “Gastropnir is it,   |   of old I made it</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">From the limbs of Leirbrimir;</p>
							<p class="line">I braced it so strongly   |   that fast it shall stand</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">So long as the world shall last.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>29</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">What call they the tree   |   that casts abroad</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Its limbs o’er every land?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.30">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.30">30</a>.</span> “Mimameith its name,   |   and no man knows</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">What root beneath it runs;</p>
							<p class="line">And few can guess   |   what shall fell the tree,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For fire nor iron shall fell it.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>31</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">What grows from the seed   |   of the tree so great,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That fire nor iron shall fell?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.32">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.32">32</a>.</span> “Women, sick   |   with child, shall seek</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Its fruit to the flames to bear;</p>
							<p class="line">Then out shall come   |   what within was hid,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And so is it mighty with men.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>33</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">What cock is he   |   on the highest bough,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That glitters all with gold?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.34">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.34">34</a>.</span> “Vithofnir his name,   |   and now he shines</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Like lightning on Mimameith’s limbs;</p>
							<p class="line">And great is the trouble   |   with which he grieves</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Both Surt and Sinmora.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.35">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.35">35</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">What call they the hounds,   |   that before the house</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">So fierce and angry are?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.36">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.36">36</a>.</span> “Gif call they one,   |   and Geri the other,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If now the truth thou wouldst know;</p>
							<p class="line">Great they are,   |   and their might will grow,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Till the gods to death are doomed.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>37</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">May no man hope   |   the house to enter,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">While the hungry hounds are sleeping?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>38</a>.</span> “Together they sleep not,   |   for so was it fixed</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">When the guard to them was given;</p>
							<p class="line">One sleeps by night,   |   the next by day,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">So no man may enter ever.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>39</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">Is there no meat   |   that men may give them,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e4102">And leap within while they eat?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>40</a>.</span> “Two wing-joints there be   |   in Vithofnir’s body,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If now the truth thou wouldst know;</p>
							<p class="line">That alone is the meat   |   that men may give them,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And leap within while they eat.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>41</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">What weapon can send   |   Vithofnir to seek</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The house of Hel below?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.42">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.42">42</a>.</span> “Lævatein is there,   |   that Lopt with runes</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Once made by the doors of death;</p>
							<p class="line">In Lægjarn’s chest   |   by Sinmora lies it,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And nine locks fasten it firm.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>43</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">May a man come thence   |   who thither goes,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And tries the sword to take?”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.44">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.44">44</a>.</span> “Thence may he come   |   who thither goes,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And tries the sword to take,</p>
							<p class="line">If with him he carries   |   what few can win,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To give to the goddess of gold.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>45</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">What treasure is there   |   that men may take</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">To rejoice the giantess pale?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.46">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.46">46</a>.</span> “The sickle bright   |   in thy wallet bear,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Mid Vithofnir’s feathers found;</p>
							<p class="line">To Sinmora give it,   |   and then shall she grant</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That the weapon by thee be won.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>47</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">What call they the hall,   |   encompassed here</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">With flickering magic flames?”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.48">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.48">48</a>.</span> “Lyr is it called,   |   and long it shall</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">On the tip of a spear-point tremble;</p>
							<p class="line">Of the noble house   |   mankind has heard,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">But more has it never known.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>49</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">What one of the gods   |   has made so great</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The hall I behold within?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.50">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.50">50</a>.</span> “Uni and Iri,   |   Bari and Jari,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Var and Vegdrasil,</p>
							<p class="line">Dori and Ori,   |   Delling, and there</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Was Loki, the fear of the folk.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>51</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">What call they the mountain   |   on which the maid</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Is lying so lovely to see?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.52">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.52">52</a>.</span> “Lyfjaberg is it,   |   and long shall it be</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">A joy to the sick and the sore;</p>
							<p class="line">For well shall grow   |   each woman who climbs it,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Though sick full long she has lain.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>53</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">What maidens are they   |   that at Mengloth’s knees</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Are sitting so gladly together?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.54">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.54">54</a>.</span> “Hlif is one named,   |   Hlifthrasa another,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thjothvara call they the third;</p>
							<p class="line">Bjort and Bleik,   |   Blith and Frith,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Eir and Aurbotha.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.55">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.55">55</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">Aid bring they to all   |   who offerings give,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">If need be found therefor?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.56">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.56">56</a>.</span> “Soon aid they all   |   who offerings give</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">On the holy altars high;</p>
							<p class="line">And if danger they see   |   for the sons of men,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Then each from ill do they guard.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>57</a>.</span> “Now answer me, Fjolsvith,   |   the question I ask,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For now the truth would I know:</p>
							<p class="line">Lives there the man   |   who in Mengloth’s arms</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">So fair may seek to sleep?”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>58</a>.</span> “No man there is   |   who in Mengloth’s arms</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">So fair may seek to sleep,</p>
							<p class="line">Save Svipdag alone,   |   for the sun-bright maid</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Is destined his bride to be.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>59</a>.</span> “Fling back the gates!   |   make the gateway wide!</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Here mayst thou Svipdag see!</p>
							<p class="line">Hence get thee to find   |   if gladness soon</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Mengloth to me will give.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Fjolsvith spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>60</a>.</span> “Hearken, Mengloth,   |   a man is come;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Go thou the guest to see!</p>
							<p class="line">The hounds are fawning,   |   the house bursts open,—</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Svipdag, methinks, is there.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Mengloth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>61</a>.</span> “On the gallows high   |   shall hungry ravens</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Soon thine eyes pluck out,</p>
							<p class="line">If thou liest in saying   |   that here at last</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The hero is come to my hall.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>62</a>.</span> “Whence camest thou hither?   |   how camest thou here?</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">What name do thy kinsmen call thee?</p>
							<p class="line">Thy race and thy name   |   as a sign must I know,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">That thy bride I am destined to be.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Svipdag spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.63">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.63">63</a>.</span> “Svipdag am I,   |   and Solbjart’s son;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Thence came I by wind-cold ways;</p>
							<p class="line">With the words of Urth   |   shall no man war,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Though unearned her gifts be given.”</p>
						</div>
						<p class="first"><i>Mengloth spake</i>:</p>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>64</a>.</span> “Welcome thou art,   |   for long have I waited;</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The welcoming kiss shalt thou win!</p>
							<p class="line">For two who love   |   is the longed-for meeting</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">The greatest gladness of all.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter" id="lg1.14.65">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#n1.14.65">65</a>.</span> “Long have I sat   |   on Lyfjaberg here,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Awaiting thee day by day;</p>
							<p class="line">And now I have   |   what I ever hoped,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">For here thou art come to my hall.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="lgouter">
							<p class="line"><span class="verseNum"><a>66</a>.</span> “Alike we yearned;   |   I longed for thee,</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">And thou for my love hast longed;</p>
							<p class="line">But now henceforth   |   together we know</p>
							<p class="line xd32e852">Our lives to the end we shall live.”</p>
						</div>
						<p>
							
						</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="div2 endNotes last-child section">
					
					<div class="divHead">
						<h3 class="main">NOTES</h3>
						<p>
							
						</p>
					</div>
					<div class="divBody">
						<p class="first" id="n1.14.1"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.1">1</a>.</span> <i>Svipdag</i> (“Swift Day”): the names of the speakers are lacking in the manuscripts.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.3"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.3">3</a>.</span> <i>The woman</i>: Svipdag’s stepmother, who is responsible for his search for <i>Mengloth</i> (“Necklace-Glad”). This name has suggested that Mengloth is really <i>Frigg</i>, possessor of the famous Brisings’ necklace, or else Freyja (cf. <i>Lokasenna</i>, 20, note).</p>
						<p id="n1.14.6"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.6">6</a>.</span> For this catalogue of charms (stanzas 6–14) cf. the <i>Ljothatal</i> (<i>Hovamol</i>, 147–165). <i>Rani</i> and <i>Rind</i>: the manuscripts have these words in inverse relation; I have followed Neckel’s emendation. Rind was the giantess who became the mother of Vali, Othin’s son, the one-night-old avenger of Baldr (cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 33–34, and <i>Baldrs Draumar</i>, 11 and note). Rani is presumably Othin, who, according to a skaldic poem, won Rind by magic.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.7"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.7">7</a>.</span> <i>Urth</i>: one of the three Norns, or Fates; cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 20.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.8"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.8">8</a>.</span> <i>Horn</i> and <i>Ruth</i>: these two rivers, here used merely to symbolize all dangerous streams, are not included in the catalogue of rivers given in <i>Grimnismol</i>, 27–29, for which reason some editors have changed the names to Hron and Hrith.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.10"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.10">10</a>.</span> This stanza is a close parallel to <i>Hovamol</i>, 150, and the fifth line may well be an interpolation from line 4 of that stanza.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.13"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.13">13</a>.</span> <i>A dead Christian woman</i>: this passage has distressed many editors, who have sought to emend the text so as to make it mean simply “a dead witch.” The fact seems to be, however, that this particular charm was composed at a time when Christians were regarded by all conservative pagans as emissaries of darkness. A dead woman’s curse would naturally be more potent, whether she was Christian or otherwise, than a living one’s. Presumably this charm is much older than the poem in which it here stands.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.16"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.16">16</a>.</span> At this point Groa’s song ends, and Svipdag, thus fortified, goes to seek Mengloth. All the link that is needed between the poems is approximately this: “Then Svipdag searched long for Mengloth, and at last he came to a great house set all about with flames. And before the house there was a giant.”</p>
						<p id="n1.14.17"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.17">17</a>.</span> Most editors have here begun a new series of stanza numbers, but if the <i>Grougaldr</i> and the <i>Fjolsvinnsmol</i> are to be considered as a single poem, it seems more reasonable to continue the stanza numbers consecutively. Bugge thinks a stanza has been lost before 17, including Fjolsvith’s name, so that the “he” in line 1 might have something to refer to. However, just such a prose link as I have suggested in the note on stanza 16 would serve the purpose. Editors have suggested various rearrangements in the lines of stanzas 17–19. The substance, however, is clear enough. The giant <i>Fjolsvith</i> (“Much-Wise”), the warder of the house in which Mengloth dwells, sees Svipdag coming and stops him with the customary threats. The assignment of the speeches in stanzas 17–20, in the absence of any indications in the manuscripts, is more or less guesswork.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.22"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.22">22</a>.</span> <i>Vindkald</i> (“Wind-Cold”), <i>Varkald</i> (“Cold of Early Spring”) and <i>Fjolkald</i> (“Much Cold”): Svipdag apparently seeks to persuade Fjolsvith that he belongs to the frost giants.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.24"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.24">24</a>.</span> <i>Svafrthorin</i>: who he was, or what his name means, or who his son was, are all unknown.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.26"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.26">26</a>.</span> <i>Thrymgjol</i> (“Loud-Clanging”): this gate, like the gate of the dead, shuts so fast as to trap those who attempt to use it (cf. <i>Sigurtharkvitha en skamma</i>, 68 and note). It was made by the dwarfs, sons of <i>Solblindi</i> (“Sun-Blinded”), the traditional craftsmen, who could not endure the light of day.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.28"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.28">28</a>.</span> <i>Gastropnir</i>: “Guest-Crusher.” <i>Leirbrimir’s</i> (“Clay-Giant’s”) <i>limbs</i>: a poetic circumlocution for “clay”; cf. the description of the making of earth from the body of the giant Ymir, <i>Vafthruthnismol</i>, 21.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.30"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.30">30</a>.</span> <i>Mimameith</i> (“Mimir’s Tree”): the ash Yggdrasil, that overshadows the whole world. The well of Mimir was situated at its base; cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 27–29.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.32"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.32">32</a>.</span> Gering suggests that two stanzas have been lost between stanzas 15 and 16, but the giant’s answer fits the question quite well enough. The fruit of Yggdrasil, when cooked, is here assumed to have the power of assuring safe childbirth.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.34"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.34">34</a>.</span> <i>Vithofnir</i> (“Tree-Snake”): apparently identical with either the cock Gollinkambi (cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 43) or Fjalar (cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 42), the former of which wakes the gods to battle, and the latter the giants. <i>Surt</i>: the giant mentioned in <i>Voluspo</i>, 52, as ruler of the fire-world; here used to represent the giants in general, who are constantly in terror of the cock’s eternal watchfulness. <i>Sinmora</i>: presumably Surt’s wife, the giantess who possesses the weapon by which alone the cock Vithofnir may be slain.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.35"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.35">35</a>.</span> The last two lines have been variously emended.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.36"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.36">36</a>.</span> <i>Gif</i> and <i>Geri</i>: both names signify “Greedy.” The first part of line 3 is conjectural; the manuscripts indicate the word “eleven,” which clearly fails to make sense.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.42"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.42">42</a>.</span> <i>Lævatein</i> (“Wounding Wand”): the manuscripts differ as to the form of this name. The suggestion that the reference is to the mistletoe with which Baldr was killed seems hardly reasonable. <i>Lopt</i>: Loki. <i>Lægjarn</i> (“Lover of Ill”): Loki; cf. <i>Voluspo</i>, 35, where the term appears as an adjective applied to Loki. This is Falk’s emendation for the manuscripts’ “Sægjarn,” meaning “Sea Lover.” <i>Sinmora</i>: cf. stanza 34.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.44"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.44">44</a><span class="corr" id="xd32e17912" title="Not in source">.</span></span> <i>Goddess of gold</i>: poetic circumlocution for “woman,” here meaning Sinmora.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.46"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.46">46</a>.</span> <i>Sickle</i>: i.e., tail feather. With this the circle of impossibilities is completed. To get past the dogs, they must be fed with the wing-joints of the cock Vithofnir; the cock can be killed only with the sword in Sinmora’s possession, and Sinmora will give up the sword only in return for the tail feather of the cock.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.48"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.48">48</a>.</span> <i>Lyr</i> (“Heat-Holding”): just what the spear-point reference means is not altogether clear. Presumably it refers to the way in which the glowing brightness of the lofty hall makes it seem to quiver and turn in the air, but the tradition, never baffled by physical laws, may have actually balanced the whole building on a single point to add to the difficulties of entrance.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.50"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.50">50</a>.</span> <i>Loki</i>, the one god named, was the builder of the hall, with the aid of the nine dwarfs. <i>Jari</i>, <i>Dori</i>, and <i>Ori</i> appear in the <i>Voluspo</i> catalogue of the dwarfs (stanzas 13 and 15); <i>Delling</i> appears in <i>Hovamol</i>, 161, and <i>Vafthruthnismol</i>, 25, in the latter case, however, the name quite possibly referring to some one else. The other dwarfs’ names do not appear elsewhere. The manuscripts differ as to the forms of many of these names.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.52"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.52">52</a>.</span> <i>Lyfjaberg</i> (“Hill of Healing”): the manuscripts vary as to this name; I have followed Bugge’s suggestion. This stanza implies that Mengloth is a goddess of healing, and hence, perhaps, an hypostasis of Frigg, as already intimated by her name (cf. stanza 3, note). In stanza 54 Eir appears as one of Mengloth’s handmaidens, and Eir, according to Snorri (<i>Gylfaginning</i>, 35) is herself the Norse Hygeia. Compare this stanza with stanza 32.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.54"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.54">54</a>.</span> The manuscripts and editions show many variations in these names. They may be approximately rendered thus: Helper, Help-Breather, Folk-Guardian, Shining, White, Blithe, Peaceful, Kindly (?), and Gold-Giver.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.55"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.55">55</a>.</span> One of the manuscripts omits stanzas 55 and 56.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.56"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.56">56</a>.</span> The first line is based on a conjectural emendation.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.63"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.63">63</a>.</span> <i>Solbjart</i> (“Sun-Bright”): not elsewhere mentioned. <i>The words of Urth</i>: i.e., the decrees of fate; cf. stanza 7.</p>
						<p id="n1.14.65"><span class="parNum"><a class="pginternal" href="#lg1.14.65">65</a>.</span> <i>Lyfjaberg</i> cf. stanza 52 and note.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
